Title: RAGTurk: Best Practices for Retrieval Augmented Generation in Turkish

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.03652v1

Published Time: Wed, 04 Feb 2026 02:21:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# RAGTurk: Best Practices for Retrieval Augmented Generation in Turkish 

Süha Kağan Köse 1, Mehmet Can Baytekin 1, Burak Aktaş 1, Bilge Kaan Görür 1,Evren Ayberk Munis 2, Deniz Yılmaz 3, Muhammed Yusuf Kartal 4, Çağrı Toraman 31Roketsan Inc., Artificial Intelligence Technologies Unit, Turkey 

> 2

Politecnico di Torino, Italy 

> 3

Middle East Technical University, Computer Engineering Department, Turkey 

> 4

TOBB University of Economics and Technology, AI Engineering Department, Turkey 

kagan.kose@roketsan.com.tr , can.baytekin@roketsan.com.tr burak.aktas@roketsan.com.tr , kaan.gorur@roketsan.com.tr evrenayberk.munis@studenti.polito.it , deniz.yilmaz_12@metu.edu.tr m.kartal@etu.edu.tr , ctoraman@metu.edu.tr 

Abstract 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) en-hances LLM factuality, yet design guidance remains English-centric, limiting insights for morphologically rich languages like Turkish. We address this by constructing a compre-hensive Turkish RAG dataset derived from Turkish Wikipedia and CulturaX, comprising question–answer pairs and relevant passage chunks. We benchmark seven stages of the RAG pipeline—from query transformation and reranking to answer refinement—without task-specific fine-tuning. Our results show that complex methods like HyDE maximize accu-racy (85%) that is considerably higher than the baseline (78.70%). Also a Pareto-optimal configuration using Cross-encoder Reranking and Context Augmentation achieves compara-ble performance (84.60%) with much lower cost. We further demonstrate that over-stacking generative modules can degrade performance by distorting morphological cues, whereas sim-ple query clarification with robust reranking offers an effective solution. 1

1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) perform strongly across many NLP tasks, yet they struggle when queries require current, domain-specific, or verifi-able information. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) mitigates these limitations by incorporat-ing external evidence during generation (Lewis et al., 2020). Over time, RAG has developed into a modular pipeline—spanning from query trans-formation to answer refinement—whose compo-nents collectively shape system performance (Gupta et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025a). Many studies have improved individual stages of 

> 1Links to our datasets and source code are available at:
> https://github.com/metunlp/ragturk

this pipeline: dense retrievers (Karpukhin et al., 2020), late-interaction models (Khattab and Za-haria, 2020), LLM-based query expansion (Gao et al., 2022; Li et al., 2025), cross-encoder rerank-ing (Nogueira and Cho, 2019), and hierarchical retrieval (Tao et al., 2025). Recent work also em-phasizes iterative reasoning in RAG (Asai et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2023b) and holistic evaluation metrics beyond answer accuracy alone (Yu et al., 2024; Es et al., 2024). However, nearly all prior RAG research targets English. For morphologically rich and moderately resourced languages like Turkish, the behavior of RAG systems remains largely unknown. Turk-ish morphology, flexible word order, and varia-tion across sources introduce retrieval and ground-ing challenges not reflected in English bench-marks. Existing work examines isolated com-ponents—retrievers (Bikmaz et al., 2025), cul-tural QA (Simsek, 2025), embeddings (Ezerceli et al., 2025), and hallucination detection (Taş et al., 2025)—but not full pipelines evaluated end-to-end on curated Turkish benchmarks. Relevant back-ground on Turkish NLP challenges and benchmark evaluation appears in (Hakkani-Tür et al., 2002; Oflazer, 2014; Umutlu et al., 2025). Meanwhile, the broader RAG ecosystem is shift-ing toward pipeline-level optimization. Frame-works such as AutoRAG (Kim et al., 2024), DSPy-RAG (Khattab et al., 2024), GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2024) and RAGSmith (Kartal et al., 2025) show that performance depends on coordinated compo-nent interaction rather than any single module. Yet these systems are also English-centric, leaving open questions about cross-linguistic transferability. To address this gap, we present the first system-atic, end-to-end evaluation of RAG pipeline compo-nents for Turkish on a dataset consisting of two parts 

> arXiv:2602.03652v1 [cs.CL] 3 Feb 2026

with similar properties (well-formed Turkish text and grounded question–answer pairs with verifiable evidence passages) but different sources. Using 4,891 Turkish Wikipedia articles and 6,305 Turkish web articles derived from CulturaX (Nguyen et al., 2024), we assess seven core pipeline stages under a unified protocol. Our contributions are: 

• A comprehensive Turkish RAG benchmark: 

we construct a unified dataset sourced from Turkish Wikipedia and CulturaX, generating grounded question–answer pairs with gold evi-dence passages across factual and interpretive question types. 

• A systematic, end-to-end pipeline study for Turkish: we benchmark seven core stages of a modern RAG stack (query transformation, candidate re-ranking, filtering & selection, context augmentation, condensation, prompt composition, and answer refinement) under a unified protocol. 

• Optimized recipes and reproducible release: 

we distill actionable strategies—identifying a Pareto-optimal configuration that balances accuracy and efficiency while highlighting the risks of over-stacking LLM modules—and re-lease the datasets, prompts, configuration files, and evaluation scripts to support reproducible Turkish-RAG research. 

2 Related Work 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) strength-ens Large Language Models (LLMs) with grounded, domain-specific information. Since Lewis et al. (Lewis et al., 2020), RAG has developed into a modular pipeline where choices across components (from query transformation to retrieval, rerank-ing/selection, context construction/condensation, prompting, and answer refinement) jointly deter-mine performance (Gupta et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025a). Recent evaluation work cor-respondingly argues for holistic assessment beyond generation quality, emphasizing retrieval effective-ness, grounding, attribution, and factual reliabil-ity (Yu et al., 2024; Es et al., 2024). 

Retriever Architectures and Query Trans-formation. Dense retrieval replaces sparse lexical matching with neural representations; DPR (Karpukhin et al., 2020) demonstrates strong gains over BM25 on knowledge-intensive tasks, and hybrid dense+lexical approaches further im-prove robustness across query types (Lin et al., 2021). Complementary work improves recall via query reformulation/expansion: HyDE (Gao et al., 2022) generates hypothetical documents to bridge lexical gaps, while surveys of query expansion and multi-query strategies show consistent benefits for ambiguous or underspecified queries (Li et al., 2025). 

Candidate Re-ranking, Context Selection, and Condensation. Reranking provides finer-grained relevance estimates after retrieval; cross-encoders (often BERT-based) remain the standard for high-precision ranking (Nogueira and Cho, 2019). Hierarchical/structured approaches such as TreeRAG (Tao et al., 2025) and related context-selection/condensation methods (e.g., selective ex-traction, compression, ordering) aim to pack the most useful evidence into limited context windows. 

Answer Refinement and Self-Reflective RAG. 

Beyond “retrieve-then-generate,” self-reflective methods such as Self-RAG (Asai et al., 2024) and FLARE (Jiang et al., 2023b) let models check sup-port, trigger additional retrieval, and revise answers, improving factuality and robustness via iterative retrieval–generation. 

System-Level Optimization: AutoRAG, DSPy-RAG, and GraphRAG. Recent work optimizes RAG end-to-end rather than tuning single com-ponents: AutoRAG (Kim et al., 2024) automates configuration over retrievers, chunking, query ex-pansion, rerankers, prompts, and post-generation modules; DSPy-RAG (Khattab et al., 2024) treats RAG assembly as optimization over declarative modules; and GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2024) uses graph-based indexing and hierarchical retrieval to exploit document structure. These systems high-light strong component interactions, but are eval-uated largely on English, leaving open questions for morphologically rich and underrepresented lan-guages. 

RAG and Retrieval in Turkish. A comprehen-sive survey of Turkish NLP resources (Çöltekin et al., 2023) provides essential background on corpora and lexical resources for the language. RAG research for Turkish is emerging: Bıkmaz et al. (Bikmaz et al., 2025) analyze retrievers and rerankers for Turkish QA, and Şimşek (Simsek, 2025) compares RAG against fine-tuning for cultur-ally grounded QA. Turkish retrieval resources such as TurkEmbed4Retrieval (Ezerceli et al., 2025) emphasize language-tailored embeddings, while Turk-LettuceDetect (Taş et al., 2025) highlights the need for grounded, verifiable outputs. In addition, recent Turkish LLM benchmarking efforts such as TurkBench (Toraman et al., 2026) include evalu-ations of retrieval-augmented generation (RAG); however, they remain limited to general-purpose benchmarking and do not target the task-specific retrieval and reasoning challenges considered here. However, most Turkish studies focus on isolated components rather than full pipelines, and do not systematically test how design choices transfer to Turkish datasets (e.g., Wikipedia articles and broad-coverage web text such as CulturaX) under rich morphology and source-dependent variation. 

Positioning our work. To address the lack of non-English RAG benchmarks, we present the first sys-tematic, end-to-end study of Turkish RAG pipelines. We construct a two-part dataset sourced from Turk-ish Wikipedia and CulturaX, and evaluate seven core pipeline stages—from query transformation to answer refinement—under a unified protocol. Our analysis identifies Pareto-optimal configurations that balance accuracy with efficiency, offering ac-tionable “recipes” for Turkish retrieval. We release these resources and findings to support reproducible research in morphologically rich languages. 

3 Dataset Construction 

To ensure broad coverage of real-world retrieval scenarios, we construct a unified Turkish RAG benchmark comprising two complementary parts that share high standards for text quality and answer-ability but differ in source characteristics: the Web Part (CulturaX) is a diverse collection of Turkish web pages derived from CulturaX (Nguyen et al., 2024), filtered to retain contentful text across a wide range of topics (e.g., everyday life, entertain-ment, news), while the Wikipedia Part consists of Turkish Wikipedia articles providing encyclopedic reference text with stronger emphasis on biography, STEM, and history. 

3.1 Corpus Acquisition and Filtering 

To ensure valid evaluation, we filter raw crawls to keep only contentful, answerable documents. For the Web Part, we start from CulturaX and sample candidate Turkish pages. We then apply a two-stage filtering procedure guided by LLM-based judgments to ensure high retrieval utility: 1. URL-only filtering (triage). Given only the base website URL, an LLM estimates whether the site likely contains valuable, informational content— operationally, pages with factual statements that could answer user queries ( valuable ) and sub-stantive prose rather than navigation menus, link lists, or boilerplate ( informational ). This stage acts as a low-cost pre-filter to exclude low-value page types such as pure landing pages, naviga-tion hubs, or aggregator farms. 2. Content-based filtering (page-level quality). For pages passing stage (1), we fetch the page text and apply a second LLM filter that checks co-herence , content depth , and utility . We retain pages that are understandable and content-rich (e.g., blog posts, forum discussions, news arti-cles) with good quality . We reject pages that are spam (keyword stuffing, bots), thin (insuffi-cient content), or boilerplate (largely non-textual content). 

Prompt design for filtering. Filtering prompts are designed to retain answerable passages while ex-cluding content that trivially breaks evaluation. We use gemini 2.5 flash (Google, 2025) for both stages; full prompts are in Appendix A (see Prompt A.1 and Prompt A.2). 

Final Web corpus. After filtering, we retain 6,305 web pages. We convert each page to Mark-down by preserving the main textual sections and mapping prominent HTML headings to Markdown headers. 

Website Frequency Analysis. We report the base-domain frequency to ensure the Web Part is not dominated by a single source. The top domains include popular sites like sikayetvar.com and haber-ler.com, but the top 10 domains cover only ∼19.6% of documents, ensuring diversity (see Appendix B, Table 5 for full list). 

Wikipedia Articles. For the Wikipedia articles, acquisition is straightforward given the structured nature of the source. We randomly sample Turk-ish Wikipedia pages, exclude short articles (< 300 chars), and retrieve plain-text sections. After filter-ing, we retain 4,891 articles and convert them to Markdown, mapping sections to headers. Table 1: Topic statistics per dataset part and overall totals. Web/Wikipedia percentages are computed w.r.t. the full dataset ( N =11 ,196 ).                                                       

> Topic Web Wikipedia Total %%#%
> Entertainment 10.7 8.1 2,104 18.8 Biography 1.4 13.9 1,712 15.3 Everyday Life 12.4 0.2 1,414 12.6 STEM 5.2 6.6 1,322 11.8 Politics 9.9 1.6 1,298 11.6 Professional 7.4 1.0 939 8.4 History 3.8 4.5 925 8.3 Organizations 3.4 2.2 627 5.6 Geography 1.0 3.7 525 4.7 Humanities 0.9 1.9 309 2.8 Uncategorized 0.1 0.0 21 0.2
> Total 56.3 43.7 11,196 100.0

3.2 Header-Aware Chunking 

We apply a header-aware chunking strategy. Each chunk inherits document and section context (e.g., page title and section path). Long segments are split if they exceed 1,000 characters. We tried different thresholds and found this character limit provides the best balance between (i) preserving enough local context for answerability and (ii) limiting topic drift. This tokenizer-agnostic limit is particu-larly stable for Turkish, where agglutination packs more information into fewer whitespace-delimited tokens. 

3.3 Topic Categorization 

We annotate each document with a unified topic la-bel using an LLM-based classifier using again gem-ini 2.5 flash (Google, 2025) as the LLM provider. We adapt our categorization approach and prompt design considerations from prior work on large-scale dataset construction (Gao et al., 2020; Sol-daini et al., 2024; Weber et al., 2024; Penedo et al., 2024; Wenzek et al., 2020; Elazar et al., 2023). Full prompts are in Appendix A (see Prompt A.3). 

Topic taxonomy. We define 10 broad topic cat-egories (Table 1). The distribution highlights the complementary nature of the dataset: The Web Part 

leans towards Everyday Life , Entertainment , and 

Politics , reflecting the conversational web. The 

Wikipedia Part has higher coverage of Biography ,

STEM , and History . Taken together, the dataset spans the full range of user queries, from checking facts on public figures to navigating forum advices. 

Table 2: Corpus and QA statistics for the complementary parts.                                  

> Statistic Web Part Wikipedia Part Total
> Articles 6,305 4,891 11,196 Characters 9,933,523 22,821,895 32,755,418 Char./Article 1,575.50 4,666.10 2,925.46 Chunks 15,985 42,304 58,289 Chunks/Article 2.54 8.65 5.21 Char./Chunk 695.61 598.81 561.97 Questions 10,682 9,777 20,459 Questions/Article 1.69 2.00 1.83 Factual 6,522 5,196 11,718 Interpretation 4,160 4,581 8,741

3.4 Question–Answer Pair Generation 

We use gpt-oss:120B (OpenAI, 2025) for gener-ation and validate with gemini-2.5-flash (Google, 2025) as an auxiliary consistency check. This cross-model verification reduces obvious hallucinations and off-topic generations, though it does not guaran-tee perfect grounding. We adapt our QA generation approach and prompt design considerations from prior work on large-scale dataset construction (Ra-jpurkar et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2018; Bloom et al., 1956; Anderson and Krathwohl, 2001; Zheng et al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2023). Full prompts are in Ap-pendix A (see Prompt A.4). Table 2 reports the final statistics. 

Interpreting corpus and QA statistics. The statistics in Table 2 confirm that the two parts offer complementary structural challenges. The 

Web Part contains more documents but with shorter average length, emphasizing precision in a broad search space. The Wikipedia Part contains fewer but much longer documents, requiring effective passage retrieval within dense, sectioned text. By covering both, and maintaining a balanced mix of 

Factual and Interpretation questions, the bench-mark provides a robust testbed for Turkish RAG systems across the spectrum of quality Turkish text. 

4 Methodology and Optimization 

Optimizing RAG pipelines requires navigating a vast combinatorial space of design choices. To address this, we adopt a two-step approach: first, we define a comprehensive design space of candi-date methods (Section 4.1); second, we employ a budgeted genetic search (Section 4.2) to efficiently identify high-performing configurations without exhaustive enumeration. 4.1 RAG Design Space 

We evaluate a modular RAG pipeline (Figure 1) and vary methods within seven technique families while holding constant the rest of the system (chunking policy, index configuration, and prompt structure) to isolate which design choices drive performance. 

> Figure 1: Overview of the RAG design space.

Selection rationale. Because the RAG literature is rapidly expanding, we focus on a representa-tive set of techniques that cover the most common control points in end-to-end RAG (query-side, re-trieval/reranking, context selection/compression, and generation-time refinement), are widely used or frequently reported as effective, and can be im-plemented reproducibly as modular components under a consistent evaluation protocol. A consistent protocol is vital for emerging ecosystems like Turk-ish (Bikmaz et al., 2025; Simsek, 2025; Ezerceli et al., 2025; Taş et al., 2025; Hakkani-Tür et al., 2002; Ezerceli et al., 2025; Umutlu et al., 2025), where rigorous standards are often lacking (Umutlu et al., 2025). For techniques that require prompts (e.g., rewriting/decomposition, HyDE-style genera-tion, reflection/revision, LLM reranking), we use the default prompts and hyperparameters recom-mended in the corresponding papers. 

Query transformation. Multi-Query Retrieval: 

Generate multiple semantically diverse rewrites of the user query and retrieve for each, then merge re-sults to improve recall (Rackauckas, 2024). Query Decomposition: Break a complex question into simpler sub-questions, retrieve for each part, and aggregate evidence before answering (Zheng et al., 2023a). Step-back Prompting: Ask a more gen-eral “step-back” question to retrieve high-level background context that helps answer the origi-nal query (Zheng et al., 2023a). HyDE: Synthesize a hypothetical answer document from the query and use it as a retrieval query to better match relevant passages (Gao et al., 2022). Query Rewriting / LLM-based expansion: Rewrite and/or expand the query with additional keywords and paraphrases to reduce lexical mismatch and improve retrieval (Wang et al., 2023; Mao et al., 2021). 

Candidate re-ranking. Cross-encoder reranking (BERT): Score each (query, passage) pair jointly with a cross-encoder and reorder retrieved pas-sages by predicted relevance (Nogueira and Cho, 2019). LLM-based reranking: Use an instruction-tuned LLM to judge relevance of candidates and reorder/retain the most useful passages for answer-ing (Lewis et al., 2020). 

Candidate filtering & selection. Top-K trunca-tion: Keep only the K highest-ranked retrieved passages to control context budget and reduce noise (Karpukhin et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2020). 

Similarity thresholding: Discard candidates below a similarity cutoff to avoid injecting weakly related context into generation (Karpukhin et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2020). Context augmentation. Prev/next chunk aug-mentation (multi-granular context): Expand a re-trieved chunk with its neighbors or multi-scale spans to recover lost local coherence from seg-mentation (Liu et al., 2025b). Relevant segment extraction: Extract only the most relevant spans within retrieved documents to maximize signal per token in the context window (Liu et al., 2025b). 

Context condensation. Prompt/context compres-sion & redundancy pruning: Compress passages and remove redundant content so more unique evi-dence fits within the model’s context length (Jiang et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2023). Tree-style summarize / iterative refine: Summarize evidence hierarchically or refine a running summary over multiple steps to preserve key facts under tight budgets (Madaan et al., 2023). 

Prompt composition. Naive concatenation (RAG baseline): Concatenate the selected passages into a single context block and prompt the model to answer grounded in that context (Lewis et al., 2020). Long-context ordering (“lost in the middle”): Vary the ordering/placement of evidence in long prompts to study position effects where mid-context facts are under-attended (Liu et al., 2024). 

Answer refinement. Reflection/Revise: Gener-ate an initial answer, critique it against the retrieved evidence, and revise to fix omissions or inconsis-tencies (Shinn et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023). 

4.2 Genetic Algorithm to Determine Effective Combinations 

The modular RAG design space is highly combi-natorial, yielding ∼1,296 possible pipelines in our setting—too many for exhaustive evaluation. To efficiently navigate this space, we employ a con-strained genetic algorithm (GA) inspired by Kartal et al. (2025). GAs are well-suited for combinato-rial optimization (Holland, 1975; Goldberg, 1989), allowing us to identify near-optimal solutions by evaluating only ∼200 pipelines (approx. 15% of the search space). We supplement this automated search with manual evaluation of established base-lines. The GA evolves a population of pipelines by (i) evaluating them on a small query set, (ii) selecting top performers, and (iii) generating new candidates via crossover and mutation, enforcing compatibility constraints. 

Genome encoding. We encode a RAG pipeline as a discrete genome: 

g = ( m1, m 2, . . . , m F )

where F is the number of technique families. Each gene mf ∈ M f selects exactly one method from family f (optionally including a None choice to disable that slot). 

Fitness function. We optimize a composite objec-tive that balances retrieval effectiveness and answer quality on an evaluation subset Q. Let R(g) denote a retrieval metric (e.g., nDCG@ k or Recall@ k)and G(g) a generation metric (e.g., judged faith-fulness/accuracy). We compute both metrics on Q

and normalize them to comparable scales (denoted by e·). The fitness of genome g is: 

Fit( g) = α · eR(g) + (1 − α) · eG(g). (1) We set α = 0 .5 to weight retrieval and generation equally, reflecting that strong RAG performance requires both (i) retrieving relevant evidence and (ii) producing a faithful and accurate response condi-tioned on that evidence. This equal weighting also avoids over-specializing the search toward pipelines that optimize retrieval quality at the expense of an-swer quality (or vice versa). 

GA Procedure and evaluation budget. We run the GA for a small number of generations to identify strong pipelines under a fixed evaluation budget. Concretely, we use population size P = 20 and 

G = 10 generations. Each candidate genome is evaluated on a randomly sampled set of |Q| = 100 

questions per domain. This yields a total of P × G

candidate evaluations while keeping per-candidate evaluation lightweight. This GA evaluation serves as the primary empirical basis for the paper’s best-practice conclusions (Section 5); the full algorithm is detailed in Appendix B (Algorithm 1). 

Reproducibility. All parameter values used in the genetic search (including selection and elitism settings, crossover/mutation operators and rates, constraint checks, and random seeds) as well as the full Python implementation of the algorithm used in our experiments are shared in the code repository. 

4.3 Experimental Setup and Metrics 

We select metrics to (i) capture complementary failure modes, (ii) align with common practice to ease comparison across RAG systems, and (iii) re-duce sensitivity to any single noisy automatic signal. Concretely, for retrieval we report a mix of coverage -oriented metrics (Recall@5) and ranking-quality 

metrics (mAP, nDCG@5, MRR), since downstream generation depends both on whether evidence is re-trieved at all and on how highly it is ranked. For gen-eration, we combine an embedding-based semantic similarity signal with an LLM-as-a-judge score to balance paraphrase-tolerant matching with a more holistic assessment of correctness and answer quality; this choice follows the recommendation to use multiple complementary evaluation criteria, including LLM-judge style assessments, when an-alyzing benchmark and system outputs (Umutlu et al., 2025). 

4.3.1 Retrieval Metrics 

We evaluate retrieval against the ground-truth evi-dence passages used to generate each Q&A. For a query q with relevant passages D⋆ and the ranked list πk(q) of top-k retrieved passages: We compute an overall retrieval score as an equally weighted aggregate of Recall@5, mAP, nDCG@5, and MRR (we report the component metrics alongside the aggregate). 

Retrieval( q) = α



Recall@5( q) + mAP( q)+ nDCG@5( q) + MRR( q)

 (2) where we set α = 0 .25 to equally weight the four complementary retrieval metrics (coverage and ranking quality) without privileging any sin-gle component, consistent with our equal-weight aggregation choices elsewhere. 

4.3.2 Generation Metrics 

We measure end-to-end answer quality with two complementary signals and compute an overall 

generation score as their equally weighted aggregate (we also report each component): (i) Semantic similarity (embedding-based similarity between the model answer and the reference answer), and (ii) 

LLM-Judge (an LLM-based judgment score for answer quality/correctness). We aggregate them as 

Generation( q) = α Sim( q) + (1 − α) Judge( q).

(3) In our experiments we set α = 0 .5 to give equal weight to semantic similarity and the judge sig-nal, reflecting a conservative choice that avoids over-optimizing to either an embedding proxy or a single LLM-based evaluator (analogous to the equal-weight aggregation used in our GA fitness objective).       

> Table 3: Compute and implementation details.
> Component Setting
> Embedding model embeddinggemma Generator model gpt-oss:120B Evaluator model gemini-2.5-flash Reranker ms-marco-MiniLM-L-12-v2 Hardware M3 Ultra 80-core GPU

4.3.3 Latency and Practicality 

We report total token usage for each configuration but do not use this metric when optimizing with the GA; we report it to take into account the practicality of the configuration when suggesting best practices. Table 3 records model versions and system settings. 

5 Best Practices 

5.1 Evaluation Protocol 

Our evaluation is performed within the GA pro-cedure (Section 4.2). We sample a stratified ran-dom subset of n = 100 questions (balanced across the Web and Wikipedia parts) from the unified benchmark and use this set both to score candidate genomes during the search and to report the final performance of the best GA-selected configurations. The full benchmark contains N ≈ 20 ,459 grounded QA pairs; subsampling keeps evaluation tractable while enabling controlled comparison across con-figurations. This evaluation procedure constitutes the empirical basis for our results. 

Why n = 100 is sufficient. In pilot runs, we varied the subset size and observed that performance estimates saturated around n = 100 . Beyond this point, variance reduction was marginal compared to the linear increase in evaluation cost. Thus, 

n = 100 serves as an efficient saturation point that yields stable mean estimates and consistent relative rankings of candidate configurations, while keeping the per-candidate evaluation cost low enough for the GA to explore many pipelines under a fixed budget. 

5.2 Overall Performance 

Table 4 summarizes the performance of the top configurations identified by the genetic search on the unified Turkish RAG benchmark ( n = 100 ). We compare the baseline against three distinct opti-mal points found by the GA: a maximum-accuracy configuration, a Pareto-optimal “best value” con-figuration, and a production-friendly configuration. The complete performance results for all notewor-thy configurations are provided in Appendix B (Table 6). 

5.3 Component Analysis and Inferences 

Our results highlight several key trade-offs in the design space of Turkish RAG systems. 

Maximizing Accuracy. If the goal is to maxi-mize the end-to-end score, the winning recipe is a combination of strong query expansion (HyDE), strong reranking (Cross-encoder Reranking), ag-gressive context compression (Tree-style Summa-rize), and Long-context Ordering. This configu-ration achieves the top score of 85.00%, driven by high generation quality (0.823). However, this comes at a significant cost: approximately 3.7× the token usage of the baseline. HyDE and summariza-tion are computationally expensive, making this approach suitable only when accuracy is paramount and resources are unconstrained. 

The Pareto Winner. The “Best Value” configu-ration (Cross-encoder Reranking + Previous/Next Chunk Augmentation + Long-context Ordering) achieves 84.60% overall score, which is only 0.4 points behind the top performer, but with signifi-cantly lower overhead. Compared to the baseline, it yields a +5.9 point improvement for ∼ 2× to-kens. This represents the cleanest recommendation for practical applications: prioritize Cross-encoder Reranking and local context enrichment (Previ-ous/Next Chunk Augmentation) before adopting expensive methods like HyDE. 

Lightweight Best Option (Production-Friendly). 

The “Production-Friendly” configuration (Query Clarification + Cross-encoder Reranking + Previ-ous/Next Chunk Augmentation) achieves 80.20% overall score, with Retrieval 0.901 and Generation 0.704, consuming ∼1,738 tokens ( ≈ 1.74 × base-line tokens). A short clarification / rewrite step plus cross-encoder reranking and adjacent-context augmentation delivers a strong accuracy gain at modest cost. This likely helps Turkish by reduc-ing morphology-driven ambiguity and improving matching for entity/surface-form variation, while avoiding extra overhead from context reordering. 

HyDE and LLM Reranking Costs. We find that HyDE is not a “free lunch” on Turkish datasets. While it helps bridge semantic gaps, it often bal-loons costs and can underperform if it introduces noise. For instance, HyDE combined with Tree-style Summarize led to high computational over-head. Similarly, LLM-based Reranking was out-performed by Cross-encoder Reranking in terms of score-per-cost. Cross-encoder Reranking proved to be a strong, reliable default, whereas LLM-based Reranking should be reserved for niche reasoning-heavy cases. 

Risks of Over-Stacking. Stacking multiple LLM-based modules often degrades efficiency without guaranteeing better performance. A maximalist pipeline combining six complex modules achieved only 79.60% accuracy, underperforming the sim-pler “High Accuracy” configuration (85.00%) while consuming heavy token usage. Excessive LLM post-processing in Turkish may distort morphologi-cal cues or accumulate errors. From these results, we can recommend adding at most one LLM-heavy stage (e.g., summarization or reflection) only when necessary, avoiding “stacking everything” without proven gain. 

Over-Filtering Problems. Strict filtering com-bined with segment extraction can severely harm retrieval in Turkish. A pipeline using strict thresh-olds and segment extraction dropped to 78.30% overall score (Retrieval 0.755), well below baseline. Morphology and paraphrase variance in noisy web data make hard thresholds risky, causing the sys-tem to miss evidence. We recommend preferring reranking over strict filtering unless thresholds are carefully calibrated per domain. 

5.4 Recommendations 

Based on these findings, we propose the following best practices for Turkish RAG: 

• Recommended Default: Use Cross-encoder Reranking + Previous/Next Chunk Augmenta-tion + Long-context Ordering . This pipeline offers a strong balance of accuracy and effi-ciency and should serve as the standard base-line for Turkish RAG experiments. 

• High-Accuracy: For leaderboards or appli-cations where score is critical, use HyDE + Cross-encoder Reranking + Tree-style Summa-rize + Long-context Ordering . This requires a higher budget for latency and tokens. 

• Production-Friendly: For latency-constrained applications, use Query Clarification + Cross-encoder Reranking + Previous/Next Chunk Table 4: Performance of GA-selected configurations on the unified benchmark ( n = 100 ). We report Overall Score, Retrieval Score, Generation Score, and estimated Token usage per query. The “High Accuracy” model achieves the best scores but at high cost, while the “Pareto Optimal” model offers the best balance.                 

> Configuration Overall Score Retrieval Score Generation Score Tokens (est.) High Accuracy (HyDE + Cross-encoder Reranking + Tree-style Summarize + Long-context Ordering) 85.00% 0.876 0.823 ∼3664
> Pareto Optimal (Cross-encoder Reranking + Previous/Next Chunk Augmentation + Long-context Ordering) 84.60% 0.870 0.823 ∼1987
> Production-Friendly (Query Clarification + Cross-encoder Reranking + Previous/Next Chunk Augmentation) 80.20% 0.901 0.704 ∼1738
> Baseline (Dense Retrieval + Similarity Thresholding + Naive Concatenation) 78.70% 0.872 0.702 ∼1000

Augmentation . This provides meaningful im-provements over naive RAG while maintaining fast response times and low token usage. These recommendations are specific to Turkish and were derived under our experimental setup. While other morphologically rich languages such as Finnish, Hungarian, and Korean face similar challenges (e.g., morphological richness, agglutina-tion, surface-form variation) (Tsarfaty et al., 2014; Gerz et al., 2018), we do not claim that our findings transfer directly; validating generalizability to other languages requires dedicated experiments. 

6 Conclusion and Future Work 

We presented an end-to-end, domain-aware study of Turkish RAG across informal web text and Turkish Wikipedia. By benchmarking modular choices across the RAG pipeline, we distill prac-tical, domain-specific configuration guidance and provide resources to support reproducible Turkish-RAG research. 

Future Work. We plan to: (i) explore hybrid RAG within a family instead of using single method from each, (ii) incorporate graph structure for re-trieval and query expansion (entity graphs, hyper-link graphs), (iii) scale to larger and more diverse Turkish corpora (news, technical documentation, legal text), (iv) study Turkish morphology-aware re-trieval features (e.g., lemma-aware sparse retrieval, morphological analyzers), (v) incorporate more noisy, real-world-like data and unanswerable ques-tions to better assess system robustness (moving beyond our current evaluation on relatively clean questions), and (vi) examine document-side, index-time methods—including pre-embeddings and re-lated pre-computation/caching techniques. We also plan controlled technique-family ablations per do-main to quantify marginal gains and interactions (retrieval vs. generation) under a fixed evaluation and budget. Additionally, we plan to conduct a structured error analysis of end-to-end outputs, fo-cusing on Turkish-specific failure modes such as inflection-driven mismatch, over-normalization of informal language, entity drift, and missing evi-dence in multi-passage questions. A systematic taxonomy and annotated error set will help separate retrieval versus generation errors and guide targeted improvements. 

7 Limitations and Ethical Considerations 

Limitations. All recommendations in this pa-per reflect our specific experimental setup (mod-els, prompts, tokenization, corpus preprocessing, hardware, and context limits). In practice, the best-performing settings can shift across Turkish corpora due to differences in domain, document length distribution, content quality, noise/boiler-plate, and latency constraints. We therefore po-sition our findings as best practices for generic Turkish text retrieval , and encourage practitioners to re-run a small sweep on their own data to iden-tify the best point on the quality–latency tradeoff. While the dataset reflects realistic web content, it is cleaner than typical production RAG pipelines and does not cover specialized domains such as legal or technical documentation; extending the bench-mark to such domains is left for future work. As a defense-industry organization, we cannot release or fully describe some proprietary data sources used during development (e.g., internal enterprise documents); therefore, this paper and the released resources focus on openly available data. 

Reproducibility and releases. We release the evaluation datasets, the full QA set with evidence spans, all RAG configuration files, and scripts to reproduce metrics in the code repository. All rec-ommendations in this paper reflect our specific experimental setup (models, prompts, tokenization, corpus preprocessing, hardware, and context lim-its). In practice, the best-performing settings can shift across Turkish corpora due to differences in domain (formal vs. informal), document length dis-tribution, noise/boilerplate, and latency constraints. We therefore position our findings as best practices for generic Turkish text retrieval , and encourage practitioners to re-run on their own data to identify the best point on the quality–latency tradeoff. 

Ethics. Informal web data can contain sensitive or personal content; we recommend careful filtering, redaction, and license-aware release. Because the data are collected from the public internet, they may reflect societal biases and other problematic content; any such content is included for research purposes only and does not reflect the authors’ opinions or endorsements. LLM-based filtering can itself introduce bias; we therefore document filtering criteria and provide audit samples where feasible. 

Data Provenance and Copyright. The Web Part of our dataset is derived from CulturaX (Nguyen et al., 2024), a publicly available multilingual cor-pus; we do not perform independent scraping of websites. Source domains (e.g., haberler.com, sikayetvar.com) were included in CulturaX due to their topical diversity and public accessibility. We release only derived annotations—question–answer pairs, topic labels, and chunk boundaries—rather than redistributing full original articles. This ap-proach aligns with standard research practices for web-derived corpora and respects the original data providers. 

Use of Generative AI. Generative AI was used solely to assist with language editing. All scientific contributions, data construction, analysis, and inter-pretations presented in this work are original and were conducted entirely by the authors. 

Acknowledgments 

We gratefully acknowledge support from Roketsan Inc. and the Google Gemini Academic Reward Program, which helped enable the experiments and computing resources used in this study. 

References 

Alfred V. Aho and Jeffrey D. Ullman. 1972. The Theory of Parsing, Translation and Compiling , volume 1. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. Lorin W. Anderson and David R. Krathwohl, editors. 2001. A Taxonomy for Learning, Teaching, and Assessing: A Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Edu-cational Objectives . Longman, New York, NY. Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. Self-RAG: Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions (ICLR) . Oral. Erdoğan Bikmaz, Mohammed Briman, and Serdar Ar-slan. 2025. Bridging the language gap in RAG: A case study on Turkish retrieval and generation. Researcher ,5(1):38–49. Benjamin S. Bloom, Max D. Engelhart, Edward J. Furst, Walker H. Hill, and David R. Krathwohl. 1956. Taxon-omy of Educational Objectives: The Classification of Educational Goals. Handbook I: Cognitive Domain .David McKay Company, Inc., New York, NY. Çağrı Çöltekin, A. Seza Doğruöz, and Özlem Çetinoğlu. 2023. Resources for Turkish natural language pro-cessing: A critical survey. Language Resources and Evaluation , 57:449–488. Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt, Dasha Metropolitansky, Robert Osazuwa Ness, and Jonathan Larson. 2024. From local to global: A graph RAG approach to query-focused summarization. arXiv preprint. Preprint , arXiv:2404.16130. Yanai Elazar, Akshita Bhagia, Ian Magnusson, Abhi-lasha Ravichander, Dustin Schwenk, Alane Suhr, Pete Walsh, Dirk Groeneveld, Luca Soldaini, Sameer Singh, Hanna Hajishirzi, Noah A. Smith, and Jesse Dodge. 2023. What’s in my big data? arXiv:2310.20707. Shahul Es, Jithin James, Luis Espinosa-Anke, and Steven Schockaert. 2024. RAGAs: Automated evaluation of retrieval augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Sys-tem Demonstrations . Association for Computational Linguistics. Özay Ezerceli, Gizem Gümüşçekiçci, Tuğba Erkoç, and Berke Özenç. 2025. TurkEmbed4Retrieval: Turkish embedding model for retrieval task. arXiv preprint. 

Preprint , arXiv:2511.07595. Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Gold-ing, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor Leahy. 2020. The Pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for language modeling. arXiv:2101.00027. Luyu Gao, Xueguang Ma, Jimmy Lin, and Jamie Callan. 2022. Precise zero-shot dense retrieval without rele-vance labels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10496 .Daniela Gerz, Ivan Vulić, Edoardo Maria Ponti, Roi Reichart, and Anna Korhonen. 2018. On the rela-tion between linguistic typology and (limitations of) multilingual language modeling. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-ral Language Processing , pages 316–327, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. David E. Goldberg. 1989. Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning . Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. Google. 2025. Gemini api: Model information. Ac-cessed: 2025-12-24. Shailja Gupta, Rajesh Ranjan, and Surya Narayan Singh. 2024. A comprehensive survey of retrieval-augmented generation (RAG): Evolution, current landscape and future directions. arXiv preprint. 

Preprint , arXiv:2410.12837. Dilek Z Hakkani-Tür, Kemal Oflazer, and Gökhan Tür. 2002. Statistical morphological disambiguation for agglutinative languages. Computers and the Humani-ties , 36(4):381–410. John H. Holland. 1975. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems . University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI. Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, and Lili Qiu. 2023a. LLMLingua: Compress-ing prompts for accelerated inference of large lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05736 .Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F. Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. 2023b. Active retrieval augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 7969–7992, Singapore. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. 2020. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In Proceedings of EMNLP .Muhammed Yusuf Kartal, Suha Kagan Köse, Korhan Sevinç, and Burak Aktas. 2025. RAGSmith: A frame-work for finding the optimal composition of retrieval-augmented generation methods across datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.01386 .Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vard-hamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, Matei Za-haria, and Christopher Potts. 2024. DSPy: Compiling declarative language model calls into state-of-the-art pipelines. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2024) .Omar Khattab and Matei Zaharia. 2020. ColBERT: Efficient and effective passage search via contextu-alized late interaction over BERT. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’20) , pages 39–48. ACM. Dongkyu Kim, Byoungwook Kim, Donggeon Han, and Matouš Eibich. 2024. AutoRAG: Automated framework for optimization of retrieval augmented generation pipeline. arXiv preprint. Preprint ,arXiv:2410.20878. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.11401 .Minghan Li, Xinxuan Lv, Junjie Zou, Tongna Chen, Chao Zhang, Suchao An, Ercong Nie, and Guodong Zhou. 2025. Query expansion in the age of pre-trained and large language models: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint. Preprint , arXiv:2509.07794. Yucheng Li, Bo Dong, Chenghua Lin, and Frank Guerin. 2023. Compressing context to enhance inference efficiency of large language models. In Proceedings of EMNLP .Jimmy Lin, Xueguang Ma, Sheng-Chieh Lin, Jheng-Hong Yang, Ronak Pradeep, and Rodrigo Nogueira. 2021. Pyserini: A Python toolkit for reproducible information retrieval research with sparse and dense representations. In Proceedings of the 44th Inter-national ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’21) ,pages 2356–2362, Virtual Event, Canada. ACM. Charles Z. Liu, Imani Abayakoon, and Farookh Khadeer Hussain. 2025a. Retrieval-augmented gen-eration: A survey of methodologies, techniques, ap-plications, and future directions. Preprint. Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paran-jape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2024. Lost in the middle: How language mod-els use long contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics .Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023. G-eval: NLG evaluation using GPT-4 with better human alignment. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pages 2511–2522, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zuhong Liu, Charles-Elie Simon, and Fabien Cas-pani. 2025b. Passage segmentation of documents for extractive question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.09940 .Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdan-bakhsh, and Peter Clark. 2023. Self-refine: Itera-tive refinement with self-feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17651 .Yuning Mao, Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Yelong Shen, Jianfeng Gao, Jiawei Han, and Weizhu Chen. 2021. Generation-augmented retrieval for open-domain question answering. In Proceedings of ACL .Thuat Nguyen, Chien Van Nguyen, Viet Dac Lai, Hieu Man, Nghia Trung Ngo, Franck Dernoncourt, Ryan A. Rossi, and Thien Huu Nguyen. 2024. CulturaX: A cleaned, enormous, and multilingual dataset for large language models in 167 languages. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Compu-tational Linguistics, Language Resources and Eval-uation (LREC-COLING 2024) , pages 4226–4237, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL. Rodrigo Nogueira and Kyunghyun Cho. 2019. Pas-sage re-ranking with BERT. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.04085 .Kemal Oflazer. 2014. Turkish and its challenges for language processing. Language resources and evalu-ation , 48(4):639–653. OpenAI. 2025. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card. 

Preprint , arXiv:2508.10925. https://openai. com/research/gpt-oss-model-card/ .Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydlíček, Loubna Ben Allal, Anton Lozhkov, Margaret Mitchell, Colin Raffel, Leandro Von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. 2024. The FineWeb datasets: Decanting the web for the finest text data at scale. arXiv:2406.17557. Zackary Rackauckas. 2024. RAG-fusion: a new take on retrieval-augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03367 .Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-ral Language Processing , pages 2383–2392, Austin, Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ash-win Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal rein-forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11366 .NeurIPS 2023. Murat Simsek. 2025. Retrieval-augmented generation versus fine-tuning for Turkish cultural question an-swering: A comprehensive evaluation and analysis. Research Square preprint. Luca Soldaini and 1 others. 2024. Dolma: an open corpus of three trillion tokens for language model pretraining research. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .Wenyu Tao, Xiaofen Xing, Yirong Chen, Linyi Huang, and Xiangmin Xu. 2025. TreeRAG: Unleashing the power of hierarchical storage for enhanced knowl-edge retrieval in long documents. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 356–371, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Selva Taş, Mahmut El Huseyni, Özay Ezerceli, Reyhan Bayraktar, and Fatma Betül Terzioğlu. 2025. Turk-lettucedetect: A hallucination detection models for Turkish RAG applications. arXiv preprint. Preprint ,arXiv:2509.17671. Çağrı Toraman, Ahmet Kaan Sever, Ayse Aysu Cengiz, Elif Ecem Arslan, Görkem Sevinç, Mete Mert Birdal, Yusuf Faruk Güldemir, Ali Buğra Kanburoğlu, Sezen Felekoğlu, Osman Gürlek, Sarp Kantar, Birsen Şahin Kütük, Büşra Tufan, Elif Genç, Serkan Coşkun, Gupse Ekin Demir, Muhammed Emin Arayıcı, Olgun Dursun, Onur Gungor, and 3 others. 2026. Turkbench: A benchmark for evaluating turkish large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.07020 .Reut Tsarfaty, Djamé Seddah, Yoav Goldberg, Sandra Kübler, Marie Candito, Jennifer Foster, Yannick Vers-ley, Ines Rehbein, and Lamia Tounsi. 2014. SPMRL-SANCL 2014 shared task on parsing morphologically rich languages. In Proceedings of the First Joint Work-shop on Statistical Parsing of Morphologically Rich Languages and Syntactic Analysis of Non-Canonical Languages , pages 103–109, Dublin, Ireland. Dublin City University. Elif Ecem Umutlu, Ayse Aysu Cengiz, Ahmet Kaan Sever, Seyma Erdem, Burak Aytan, Busra Tufan, Abdullah Topraksoy, Esra Darıcı, and Cagri Toraman. 2025. Evaluating the quality of benchmark datasets for low-resource languages: A case study on Turkish. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Generation, Evaluation and Metrics (GEM ²), pages 471–487, Vienna, Austria and virtual meeting. Association for Computational Linguistics. Liang Wang, Nan Yang, and Furu Wei. 2023. Query2doc: Query expansion with large language models. In 

Proceedings of EMNLP .Maurice Weber, Daniel Fu, Quentin Anthony, Yonatan Oren, Shane Adams, Anton Alexandrov, Xiaozhong Lyu, Huu Nguyen, Xiaozhe Yao, Virginia Adams, Ben Athiwaratkun, Rahul Chalamala, Kezhen Chen, Max Ryabinin, Tri Dao, Percy Liang, Christopher Ré, Irina Rish, and Ce Zhang. 2024. RedPajama: an open dataset for training large language models. arXiv:2411.12372. Guillaume Wenzek, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Alexis Con-neau, Vishrav Chaudhary, Francisco Guzmán, Ar-mand Joulin, and Edouard Grave. 2020. CCNet: Extracting high quality monolingual datasets from web crawl data. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Lan-guage Resources and Evaluation Conference , pages 4003–4012. Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Ben-gio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christopher D. Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Hao Yu, Aoran Gan, Kai Zhang, Shiwei Tong, Qi Liu, and Zhaofeng Liu. 2024. Evaluation of retrieval-augmented generation: A survey. arXiv preprint. 

Preprint , arXiv:2405.07437. Penghao Zhao, Hailin Zhang, Qinhan Yu, Zhen-gren Wang, Yunteng Geng, Fangcheng Fu, Ling Yang, Wentao Zhang, Jie Jiang, and Bin Cui. 2024. Retrieval-augmented generation for AI-generated content: A survey. arXiv preprint. Preprint ,arXiv:2402.19473. Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Swaroop Mishra, Xinyun Chen, Heng-Tze Cheng, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. 2023a. Take a step back: Evoking reasoning via abstraction in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06117 . ICLR 2024. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023b. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena. arXiv preprint. Preprint , arXiv:2306.05685. A Prompts and Validation Rubrics 

A.1 URL-only Filtering Prompt URL Filtering 

Analyze the following website (base URL) and determine its eligibility: Website: {url} Evaluate: 1. Does this website likely contain valuable information (educational, informative, useful content)? ,→

2. Is the content on this website likely written in proper language (casual, conversational)? ,→

Based on your analysis of the website domain and typical content, provide: - Status: "ELIGIBLE" if BOTH conditions are true, otherwise "NOT ELIGIBLE" - Reason: Brief explanation (1-2 sentences) Response format: Status: [ELIGIBLE/NOT ELIGIBLE] Reason: [Your explanation] 

A.2 Content Filtering Prompt Content Filtering 

You are a data quality and style evaluator. You will be given TURKISH text taken from a web page, along with the URL it came from. ,→

TASK 1 -- EVALUATION Evaluate whether the text is: - suitable for a RAG system, - understandable, - and "CLEAN" (everyday language; not nonsense/trash). Definitions: 1) Informality level: - "clean": Everyday language (blog/forum/social media), but: * understandable * slightly relaxed yet still structured * similar to news-site tone * sentences mostly well-formed * no heavy slang, no spam - "nonsense_or_spam": incoherent, random words, bot/spam, only links/hashtags, etc. ,→

2) Quality: - "good": clear, coherent, not full of spelling errors, topic is followable, usable for RAG ,→

- "bad": too short, messy, major spelling/spam issues, topic not followable 3) ELIGIBLE criteria: - mostly Turkish - "Clean" - Quality must be "good" - definitely NOT "formal" - definitely NOT "nonsense_or_spam" - text length > 100 characters - mostly about a single topic/theme IMPORTANT: First do the evaluation and determine Status. TASK 2 -- MARKDOWN CONVERSION (ONLY IF ELIGIBLE) WARNING: Do this step ONLY if Status: ELIGIBLE. If NOT ELIGIBLE, do NOT convert to markdown. ,→If Status: ELIGIBLE: 1) Detect headings and use markdown headings (#) 2) Split paragraphs 3) Remove unnecessary whitespace 4) Do not change content beyond that; do not add new content OUTPUT FORMAT: Status: [ELIGIBLE/NOT ELIGIBLE] Reason: [Short explanation] ---MARKDOWN_START---[ONLY if Status: ELIGIBLE, put the markdown-converted text here] [If Status: NOT ELIGIBLE, leave this section COMPLETELY EMPTY] ---MARKDOWN_END---URL: {url} Text: {text} 

A.3 Topic Classification Prompt Topic Classification 

You are labeling Turkish text for an LLM dataset. You must not use or infer any "source type" (Wikipedia vs web) in your decision. Treat every document the same. 

> ,→
> ,→

You will be given one document: title (optional), url (optional), and text (may be truncated). ,→

Task: 1) Assign exactly ONE topic category: topic_l1 2) Assign exactly ONE safety category: safety_label Allowed values: topic_l1 (choose exactly one): - STEM - Humanities - Social_Sciences - Professional_Applied - Culture_Entertainment - Everyday_Life - Geography_Places - Biography_People - Organizations_Institutions - Events_History - Meta_Content safety_label (choose exactly one): - Safe - Needs_Filtering - Exclude Safety guidelines: - Safe: ordinary content with no clear policy risks. - Needs_Filtering: contains potentially sensitive/age-restricted/controversial material or advisory content (e.g., medical or financial advice, explicit profanity/hate slurs contextually used, graphic descriptions) but not clearly disallowed. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

- Exclude: clearly disallowed or high-risk content, such as explicit instructions for wrongdoing (e.g., making weapons, fraud), explicit sexual content involving minors, actionable self-harm instructions, doxxing/PII, extremist recruitment/praise, or pervasive hate/harassment. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Output rules: - Output JSON only. No markdown. No extra keys. - Keep rationale <= 200 characters, grounded only in the given text. JSON format: {"topic_l1": "...", "safety_label": "...", "rationale": "..." }Now label this document: TITLE: {{title}} URL: {{url}} TEXT: {{text}} 

A.4 QA Generation Prompts 

We employ two types of prompts for question generation depending on the context: single-chunk and multi-chunk generation. 

A.4.1 Single Chunk Generation Single Chunk Generation 

Generate exactly {num_questions} question-answer pair(s) that can be answered from this text chunk: ,→

Chunk ID: {chunk_id}{context_info} Text: {chunk_content} Each question must be categorized into one of these two categories: 1. **FACTUAL**: Questions that test direct recall of specific details. The answer is a specific name, date, number, or short verbatim phrase found directly in the text. 

> ,→
> ,→

2. **INTERPRETATION**: Questions that test comprehension by asking for explanations of causes, effects, or relationships between concepts in the text. The answer requires synthesizing information rather than just quoting it. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Requirements: - Only ask about information explicitly stated in this text - Make questions specific and factual - Each question should be answerable from this chunk alone - Provide complete, accurate answers based solely on the chunk content - Categorize each question appropriately based on the type of cognitive task required ,→

- Return valid JSON with the specified structure - Do NOT use markdown code blocks (like) - Return ONLY the JSON object, no other text 

A.4.2 Multi-Chunk Generation Multi-Chunk Generation 

Generate exactly {num_questions} question-answer pair(s) that require information from multiple chunks below. ,→

These chunks are related. Generate questions that: 1. Require information from at least 2 of the provided chunks 2. Are about connections, relationships, comparisons, or broader concepts across chunks ,→

3. Cannot be answered from any single chunk alone{context_info} Each question must be categorized into one of these two categories: 1. **FACTUAL**: Questions that test direct recall of specific details. The answer is a specific name, date, number, or short verbatim phrase found directly in the text. 

> ,→
> ,→

2. **INTERPRETATION**: Questions that test comprehension by asking for explanations of causes, effects, or relationships between concepts in the text. The answer requires synthesizing information rather than just quoting it. 

> ,→
> ,→
> ,→

Chunks: {chunks_text} Requirements: - Focus on relationships and connections between the chunks - Make questions that require synthesis of information - Provide complete answers that synthesize information from multiple chunks - Categorize each question appropriately based on the type of cognitive task required ,→

- Return valid JSON with chunk IDs {chunk_ids} in related_chunk_ids - Do NOT use markdown code blocks (like) - Return ONLY the JSON object, no other text 

A.5 QA Validation Rubric QA Validation System Prompt 

You evaluate question-answer pairs for accuracy. Check if: - Question is clear - Answer is accurate based on provided text chunks - Answer fully addresses the question - Chunks contain all necessary information Return JSON: {"is_correct": boolean, "reason": "brief explanation"} Keep reason concise (max 50 words). Return ONLY valid JSON. 

B Full Experimental Results and Algorithms 

Algorithm 1 Genetic search over modular RAG pipelines 

Require: Families {M f }Ff =1 , population size P , generations G, mutation rate μ, evaluation set Q

1: Initialize population P0 = {gi}Pi=1 by sampling valid genomes 

2: for t = 1 to G do 

3: Evaluate Fit( g) for all g ∈ P t−1 on Q

4: Select elites E and parents S (e.g., tournament selection) 

5: Create offspring via crossover over genomes in S

6: Mutate genes with probability μ

7: Form Pt ← E ∪ O 

8: end for 

9: return best genomes from PGTable 5: Top base domains by document frequency with cumulative coverage (Web Part). 

Domain Docs Cumulative % 

sikayetvar.com 227 3.6 haberler.com 158 6.1 posta.com.tr 134 8.2 mynet.com 132 10.3 donanimhaber.com 108 12.0 webtekno.com 100 13.6 onedio.com 98 15.2 sondakika.com 98 16.7 fanatik.com.tr 91 18.2 haberaktuel.com 89 19.6 

Table 6: Complete performance results for noteworthy evaluated RAG configurations. 

RAG Methods Combination Overall Score Retrieval Generation Total Token Usage 

hyde + ce_rerank + tree_summarize + long_context_reorder 85.00% 0.876 0.823 3,663.8 hyde + ce_rerank + llm_summarize + reflection_revising 84.90% 0.876 0.822 3,118.4 hyde + ce_rerank + tree_summarize + reflection_revising 84.80% 0.876 0.819 3,966.2 ce_rerank + adjacent_augmenter + long_context_reorder 84.60% 0.87 0.823 1,987.2 hyde + tree_summarize 84.50% 0.892 0.798 5,260.4 hyde + ce_rerank + tree_summarize + long_context_reorder + reflection_revising 84.50% 0.876 0.814 3,964.1 hyde + ce_rerank + adjacent_augmenter + tree_summarize + long_context_reorder 84.40% 0.876 0.812 4,906.3 ce_rerank + adjacent_augmenter + long_context_reorder 84.40% 0.865 0.822 2,036.8 hyde + tree_summarize + long_context_reorder 84.30% 0.892 0.794 5,276.3 ce_rerank + adjacent_augmenter + llm_summarize + long_context_reorder 83.40% 0.87 0.799 2,703.2 hyde + long_context_reorder + reflection_revising 83.10% 0.896 0.765 2,339.3 hyde + llm_rerank + tree_summarize 83.10% 0.868 0.795 4,295.2 hyde + adjacent_augmenter + long_context_reorder 82.90% 0.896 0.761 3,138.8 adjacent_augmenter + long_context_reorder 82.70% 0.896 0.758 2,147.0 llm_rerank + adjacent_augmenter + llm_summarize 82.70% 0.863 0.792 2,973.8 ce_rerank + llm_summarize + long_context_reorder 82.40% 0.87 0.778 2,167.4 ce_rerank + long_context_reorder + reflection_revising 82.40% 0.865 0.783 1,773.4 hyde + relevant_segment_extractor + llm_summarize + long_context_reorder 82.00% 0.891 0.75 2,685.5 ce_rerank + adjacent_augmenter + tree_summarize + long_context_reorder 81.90% 0.865 0.772 4,762.7 hyde + llm_summarize + long_context_reorder 81.50% 0.896 0.733 3,437.9 simple_query_refinement_clarification + ce_rerank + adjacent_augmenter + long_context_reorder 81.10% 0.904 0.719 1,928.6 adjacent_augmenter + llm_summarize + long_context_reorder 81.10% 0.896 0.726 3,073.2 hyde + llm_summarize 81.10% 0.896 0.726 3,409.4 ce_rerank + relevant_segment_extractor + llm_summarize + long_context_reorder + reflection_revising 81.10% 0.87 0.753 2,828.2 hyde + llm_summarize 80.90% 0.896 0.723 3,261.5 hyde + adjacent_augmenter + llm_summarize + long_context_reorder 80.70% 0.896 0.717 3,994.5 hyde + llm_summarize + long_context_reorder 80.60% 0.896 0.715 3,472.5 hyde + llm_summarize + long_context_reorder + reflection_revising 80.50% 0.896 0.714 3,806.4 ce_rerank + relevant_segment_extractor + tree_summarize + long_context_reorder 80.50% 0.87 0.74 3,886.9 simple_query_refinement_clarification + ce_rerank + adjacent_augmenter 80.20% 0.901 0.704 1,738.0 query_expansion_simple_multi_query_borda + ce_rerank + adjacent_augmenter 80.00% 0.887 0.712 1,431.4 llm_rerank + llm_summarize 80.00% 0.885 0.715 2,707.5 simple_query_refinement_clarification + llm_rerank + adjacent_augmenter 79.80% 0.903 0.693 2,291.5 simple_query_refinement_clarification + ce_rerank + adjacent_augmenter + reflection_revising 79.80% 0.9 0.697 1,991.6 simple_query_refinement_clarification + ce_rerank + adjacent_augmenter + tree_summarize + long_context_reorder + reflection_revising 79.60% 0.836 0.756 4,524.5 query_expansion_simple_multi_query_borda + ce_rerank + similarity_threshold + adjacent_augmenter + llm_summarize + reflection_revising 79.40% 0.882 0.706 2,155.3 hyde + ce_rerank + llm_summarize + long_context_reorder 79.40% 0.877 0.711 3,197.8 hyde + tree_summarize + long_context_reorder 79.30% 0.896 0.689 7,137.7 hyde + ce_rerank + adjacent_augmenter + llm_summarize 79.30% 0.877 0.708 3,343.6 vector_simple + simple_threshold + simple_listing (Baseline) 78.70% 0.872 0.702 1,000.4 adjacent_augmenter + tree_summarize + long_context_reorder 78.40% 0.896 0.672 7,216.6 ce_rerank + similarity_threshold + relevant_segment_extractor + tree_summarize + reflection_revising 78.30% 0.755 0.81 2,717.9