Title: 2512.23501v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2512.23501v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Dec 2025 02:32:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 37

Markdown Content:
1

Operando study of the evolution of peritectic structures in metal solidification by 

quasi -simultaneous synchrotron X -ray diffraction and tomography                                         

> Kang Xiang 1,Yueyuan Wang 1,Shi Huang 1, 2 ,Hongyuan Song 1, Alberto Leonardi 3, Peter Garland 3,
> Sharif Ahmed 3,Michał M. Kłosowski 4,Hongmei Yang 5,Meng nie Li 5, *, Jiawei Mi 1,*
> 1School of Engineering and Technology , University of Hull, Hull, HU6 7RX, UK
> 2School of Engineering and Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, Westlake University, Hangzhou ,
> 310030, P.R. China
> 3Diamond Light Source Ltd., Didcot, Oxfordshire ,OX11 0DE, UK
> 4Research Complex at Harwell, Didcot, Oxfordshire, OX11 0FA, UK
> 5Faculty of Material Science and Engineering, Yunnan Key Laboratory of Integrated Computational
> Materials Engineering for Advanced Light Alloys, Kunming University of Science and Technology,
> Kunming, 650093, P.R. China
> * Corresponding author s:J.Mi@hull.ac.uk (J. Mi), limengnie@kust.edu.cn (M. Li)

Abstract 

Using quasi -simultaneous synchrotron X -ray diffraction and tomography techniques, we have 

studied in -situ and in real -time the nucleation and co -growth dynamics of the peritectic 

structures in an Al -Mn alloy during solidification . We collected ~30 TB 4D data sets which allow 

us to elucidate the phases ’ co -growth dynamics and the ir spatial , crystallographic and 

compositional relationship . The primary Al 4Mn hexagonal prisms nucleate and gr ow with high 

kinetic anisotropy -70 times faster in the axial direction than the radial direction . In all cases ,

a ~5 μm Mn -rich diffusion layer forms at the liquid -solid interface , creating a sharp local solute 

gradient that governs subsequent phase transformation . The peritectic Al 6Mn phases nucleate 

epitaxially within this diffusion zone, initially forming a thin shell surrounding the Al 4Mn with an 

orientation relationship of {10 1̅0} HCP // {110} O, [0001] HCP // [001] O. Such ~5 μm Mn -rich diffusion 

layers also cause solute depletion at the liquid side of the liquid -solid interface, limiting further 

epitaxial phase growth, but prompting phase re -nucleation and branch ing at crystal edges ,

resultin g tetragonal prism structures that no longer follow the initial orientation relationship .

The anisotropic diffusion also led to the formation of core defect s at the centre of both phases. 

Furthermore, increasing cooling rate from 0.17 to 20 °C/s can disrupt the stability of the solute 

diffusion zone, effectively suppressing the formation of the core defect s and forcing a transition 

from faceted to non -faceted morpholog ies. Our work establishes a new theoretical framework 

for how to tailor and control the peritectic structures in metallic alloys through solidification 

processes .

Keywords : Synchrotron X -ray; Diffraction ; Tomography; Dynamics; Al -Mn alloy; Peritectic 

reaction; Intermetallics; Solidification .2

1.  Introduction 

Peritectic reaction in an alloy system is a very common phase reaction (or transformation ) in 

the liquid -to -solid solidification processes [1 -3] , in which the primary solid phase (i.e., the 1st 

phase solidifie d from the liquid ) react s with the remaining liquid to form the 2 nd solid phase. 

The resulting peritectic phase (normally an intermetallic compound) often ha s a complex 

composite -type structure coupled with convoluted 3D morpholog y [3 -6] . The dynamic 

evolution of such structure and morphology is mainly determined or driven by (1) the inherent 

materials properties (the primary phase ’s structure , size and morphology , atom diffusion and 

liquid -solid interfac ial propert ies ); (2) the thermodynamic driving forces and /or external fields 

that are present at the reaction (e.g. , thermal gradient , cooling rate, natural /forced convection, 

and magnetic fields, etc ) [3, 7 -9] ; and (3) any other phase reactions that are directly interacti ng 

with the peritectic reaction . Normally, t he crystalline structure of t he primary phase ha s a

profound effect on the nucleation and growth dynamics of the 2nd phase . For example, Lü et 

al [6] studied the Ni -Zr system and identified the orientation relationships between the primary 

Ni 7Zr 2 and peritectic Ni 5Zr phase s as {111} Ni 7Zr 2 // {111} Ni 5Zr . Liu et al [9] investigated the 

Sn -Co system and found tha t the primary CoSn and peritectic CoSn 2 phases followed 

orientation relationships of {0001} CoSn // {110} CoSn 2 and {10 1̅0} CoSn // {110} CoSn 2. Also, 

refin ing the size of the primary phase has a dominant effect o n enhancing peritectic 

transformation in peritectic steel systems and superconductor materials [7, 10] . Clearly , an in -

depth understanding of the compositional, spatial and crystallographic orientation 

relationship s of th e peritectic phases is crucial for tailoring and controlling the final peritectic 

microstructures. Unfortunately , there ha ve been very limited real -time and operando studies 

in th is direction , especially in 4D sp ace (3D + time) .

Here, we are particularly interested in the peritectic system s with the primary phase having a

hexagonal close -packed ( HCP ) structure and the 2 nd phase having an orthorhombic structure. 

There are a large number of scientifically and technologically important alloy systems with 

their peritectic structures formed via such HCP to orthorhombic structure transition . For 

example the Al -Mn system ( HCP Al 4Mn to orthorhombic Al 6Mn ) [11] ; the Ti -Al binary system 

(HCP α-Ti to orthorhombic TiAl) [12] . The thermoelectrical Zn -Sb binary system ( HCP α-Zn to 

orthorhombic ZnSb ) [13] . To the best of our knowledge, so far , there are no systematic in -situ 

and operando studies dedicated to the real -time peritectic reaction dynamics with the HCP to 

orthorhombic structure transition .

Here , we used an Al -Mn binary system as the model alloy and did a systematic and 

comprehensive operando studies on how the primary phase ( Al 4Mn ) to initiate the 2 nd phase 

(Al 6Mn ) at the peritectic reaction and the subsequent growth dynamics . We choose such 

system is because the Al -Mn alloy system has a series of typical peritectic reaction s at certain 

compositions and temperature in solidification . There are multiple Al -Mn intermetallic phases 3

(Al 6Mn – HCP structure ) and Al 4Mn (orthorhombic structure ), whic h are nucleated either 

concurrently or sequentially (especially when the Mn is > 1.6 wt.%) [14, 15] . The nucleation 

and co -growth of these intermetallics is driven by the intricate thermodynamic and kinetic 

interactions, including competitive nucleation, solute redistribution, phase impingement, etc 

[16, 17] . These dynamic interactions often produce compl icated 3D morphologi es that are very 

difficult , if not impossible, to be characteri zed or quantif ied by ex -situ approaches [18] . More 

importantly, Mn is a very unique element that is able to change or alter a series of intermetallic 

phases in the Al -based alloys containing Si, Mg, Cu, Zr, and Fe, etc . Particular ly useful or 

effective in chang ing or altering the Fe -containing intermetallic phases [19, 20] . Thus, many 

attempts have been made in the past to optimise their size, morphology and distribution 

characteristics [20 -23] . But majority of these studies have used traditional 2D metallographic 

techniques in characterisation , which are not able to reveal the true 3D complexity and 

dynamic evolution of these intermetallic phases at the peritectic reactions during solidification. 

Recent advances of the X -ray and electron based in -situ characterization techniques make it 

possible to obtain complementary real space and reciprocal space data for metal alloys in 

solidification under operando conditions [5, 24 -27] . For example, simultaneous X-ray 

diffraction and tomography techniques can obtain the crystallographic evolution and 3D 

morphology of solidifying phases in real time [24 -26, 28] . It is essential for studying the 

nucleation and growth dynamics of intermetallic compounds , tracking precisely the phases’ 

growth and morphological evolution [25, 29] . The obtained real -time data are critical for us to 

understand and quantify the nucleation, growth , and transformation dynamics of different 

phases , which control the microstructural development during the solidification process es [25, 

29 -32] .

In this paper , we present our recent work of using the quasi -simultaneous synchrotron X -ray 

diffraction and tomography technique s available at the DIAD beamline (K11) of the Diamond 

Light Source to study in -situ and in real -time the nucleation and co -growth dynamics of 

coupled peritectic phases and their compositional, spatial and orientation relationships in an 

Al -8wt .%Mn alloy during the solidification process. This systematic research work has 

produced ~30 TB 4D (3D space + time) datasets that allow us to fully understand the 

underlying mechanisms of the nucleation and co -growth dynamics of the coupled peritectic 

phases and the complete evolution of the peritectic reactions. These findings provide a 

quantitative and theoretical foundation for tailoring the architecture, and hence the properties, 

of peritectic alloys through precise control of solidification kinetics. 

2.  Experiments and methods 

2.1.  Alloy s sample preparation 4

The Al -8wt .%Mn ingot was made by melting 230 g pure Al (99.96 wt.%) and 20 g pure Mn 

(99.85 wt.%, purchased from the Goodfellow, UK) in a n alumina boat crucible (the crucible 

inner surface was coated with a boron nitride spray) using a tube furnace operated at 1200 °C 

for ~6 hours . During the heating and melting process , high -purity argon gas (flow rate of 0.6 

L/ min) was flowed into the tube furnace to prevent oxidation. After complet ely melted the 

charge, the alloy was cooled down with the furnace (switched off the heating power) to room 

temperature. Then, the ingot was placed into an electrical resistance furnace and remelted at 

~800 °C. During the remelting operation, stirring of the melt was carried out in every 10 

minutes to homogenize the melt temperature and composition . Finally, the melt was vacuum -

sucked into a quartz tube ( Φ 2 mm × 200 mm , 1 mm wall thickness ) using a dedicated counter -

gravity casting apparatus [33] at a negative pressure of 70 KPa , solidif ied inside the quartz 

tube to form cylindrical bar samples .

2.2.  Quasi -simultaneous synchrotron X -ray diffraction and tomography experiments 

Figs. 1a and 1b show the experimental set -up for the quasi -simultaneous synchrotron X -ray 

diffraction and tomography experiments at the DIAD beamline (K11) of the Diamond Light 

Source (DLS) [34] . For a detailed description of the quartz tube furnace, please refer to [35] .

The alloy sample ( Φ 1.8 × 15 mm) was put inside a capillary quartz tube ( Φ 2.5, 0.1 mm wall 

thickness), which was set on top of an alumina tube holder ( Φ 5 × 100 mm, 1.0 mm wall 

thickness). The capillary tube with the sample was then placed inside the quar tz tube furnace 

chamber surrounded by an electrical -resistance heating coil (see the inset in Fig. 1a). The 

furnace temperature was controlled by an Omega PID thermal controller (CN16DPT -440). 

Three Φ 0.25 mm K -type thermocouples (labelled as TC1, TC2 and TC3 in Fig. 1a) were used 

to control and monitor the temperatures inside the capillary tube and the quartz furnace 

chamber. Because of rotating operation during tomography scans, the thermocouple was 

placed approximately ~3 mm above the top of the sample. A PicoTC08 data logger and 

PicoLog6 software were used to record the temperature. Before any in -situ experiment, 

melting of the alloy sample and control of the temperature profile were thoroughly tested and 

repeated in the lab to ensure a consistent operat ion and repeatable thermal profile for all 

subsequent experiments. Firstly, the sample was heated to ~810 °C and held for 15 min to 

homogenize the temperature. Then the melt was cooled with a cooling rate of 10 °C/min 

(~0.17 °C/s) until the melt was completely solidified (Fig. 1c). 5

Fig. 1. (a) A schematic of the experimental set -up for the quasi -simultaneous synchrotron X -

ray diffraction and tomography experiments at the DIAD beamline (K11) of the DLS. (b) A 

photo, showing the furnace and set -up on the sample stage at DIAD. (c) The heating and 

cooling temperature profile during the solidification process . Video 1 illustrates more clearly 

how the diffraction and tomography scans were executed. 

2.3.  The s ynchrotron X -ray parameters used 

The beamline has an innovative optics layout that can “guide” two independent X -ray beams 

to reach the sample position in parallel for diffraction and imaging (tomography) acqui sition 

[34] . A beam selector (see Fig. 1a) is positioned downstream of the wiggler for select ing either 

the diffraction or imaging beam for data acquisition , i.e., selecting one but block ing the other 

in order to avoid any crosstalk of the two X -ray signals. Switching between th e two beams can 

be realised in a few Hz. Downstream of the beam selector, a pair of Pt -coated Kirkpatrick –

Baez (KB) mirror s are used for ‘moving’ and focusing the diffraction beam onto the pre -

designed spot s of the sample (see Fig. 1a) [34] . However, there are no further optics for the 

imaging beam. For the diffraction scans, a monochromatic X -ray beam of 24.85 keV (25 × 25 

μm spot size ) and a PILATUS3 X CdTe 2M detector (Dectris AG, Baden -Daetwill, Switzerland) 6

were used. T he diffraction beam was from two horizontally reflecting mirrors and a horizontal 

bounce Si (111) monochromator. Diffraction patterns were collected on a grid of 5 × 3 points 

(each pattern with 3 s exposure time ). T he scan path was shown o n the tomography projection 

in Fig. 1a . The step size was 250 μm in horizontal and 500 μm in vertical direction . The beam 

did no t overlap between any two adjacent diffraction points. The scan was made by “mov ing ”

the KB -mirror instead of moving the sample [36] . A complete set of diffraction scan (i.e., 15 

patterns , including dark -field and flat -field collection ) took ~ 50 s. 

Table 1. The experimental parameters used for diffraction and tomography acquisitions 

Diffraction (monochromatic beam)  Tomography (pink beam) 

X-ray energy  24.85 keV  X-ray energy  20.00 keV 

Beam size  25  × 25  μm  Beam size  1.7  × 1.7 mm 

Detector  PILATUS3 X CdTe 2M  Camera  PCO.edge 5.5 

Pixel size  172 × 172 μm  Effective pixel size  0.54 μm 

Image size  1475 × 1679 pixels  Field of view  2560 × 2160 pixel 

Calibra nt  LaB 6 660b  No. of projections  3000 

Exposure time  3.0 s  Exposure time  1.0 ms 

Sample -to -detector 

distance 

~4 11 mm  Sample -to -scintillator 

distance 

~135 mm 

After each compete set of diffraction scan , a pink beam of 20 keV and a PCO.edge 5.5 camera 

(Excelitas Technologies, Waltham, MA 02451) were used for the tomography scan. The 

scintillator was coupled with a 12× optical microscope, achieving an effective pixel size of 0.54 

μm in a field of view (FOV) of ~1.4 (width) × 1.2 (height) mm (2560 × 2160 pixels). Each full 

tomography scan (including dark -field, flat -field collection, and data transferring) also took ~50

s to complete . Video 1 shows a combination of the temperature profile, the diffraction and 

tomography scan path . Table 1 lists the parameters used for diffraction and tomography .

2.4.  Data processing 

The diffraction data w ere pre -processed using DAWN (v2.23.0 ) [37] and Fit2D (v18.002) [38] ,

including masking out the defect pixel s, subtracting background, calibrating the detector 

relative to the X-ray beam (in the yaw and pitch direction) , azimuthal integration. The 

tomography data was pre -processed using the SAVU pipeline [39] , including dark -field and 

flat -field correction, centre -of -rotation finding, and ring artefact removal and reconstruction. 

Phase index and identification in the 1D diffraction spectra were made using Match!3 [40] . 2D 7

tomographic slices were post -processed using ImageJ (1.54f, NIH, USA) [41] and rendered 

using Avizo 3D (2021.1, Thermo Fish Scientific, USA). 

3.  Result s

3.1.  Phases and morphologies acquired quasi -simultaneously during solidification 

Fig . 2a shows the scan path (direction) of the diffraction beam and the 15 point s (i.e. , 5 × 3 

points) where diffraction patterns were collected inside the ima ging FOV (i.e., the tomography 

projection) . Fig . 2b present s the X -ray diffraction intensity spectra of 3 typical points (red, 

yellow, and green) . Fig s. 2 c (top cross -sectional view) and 2d (front cross -sectional view) show 

the 2D tomographic slice s collecte d immediately after each full diffraction scan in the 

solidification process. Fig. b1 shows that, a t 768 °C (the black line) , there is no crystalline 

phase peaks, indicating that the alloy melt was in a full liquid state. As the melt was cooled 

down, the tomography (Figs. 2c1 and 2d1 at 760 °C) collected right after the diffraction scan 

showed a polygonal structure appeared, which was identified as the Al 4Mn phase (HCP 

structure, a=b=1.998 nm, c=24.673 nm, space group: P63/mmc, 194). As further cooling of 

the melt, more Al 4Mn phases of different sizes appeared in the FOV (Figs. 2c2 to c4 and 2d2 

to d4), and the diffraction peaks became more prominent, indicating that these Al 4Mn phases 

were growing rapidly in the melt. Below the peritectic temperature (i.e., 705 °C , see Fig. S1 of 

the Supplementary Materials ), more new and intensive diffraction peaks appeared (the purple 

spectrum shown in Fig s. 2b1, b2 and b3 ), which were indexed as the Al 6Mn phase 

(orthorhombic structure, a=0.755 nm, b=0.650 nm, c=0.887 nm, space group: Cmcm, 63). The 

immediately after tomography scan (Figs. 2c5 and 2d5 at 688 °C) shows that most of the early 

formed simple polygonal structures were transformed into a more complex cauliflower -type 

morphology, indicating peritectic transformation occurred at this stage. When the temperature 

was below 660 °C, two sharp p eaks near 2 θ = 12.2° and 14.1° appeared, indicating the 

formation of the α-Al phase. After this, the diffraction spectra remained the similar profiles until 

300 °C. Hence, the fully solidified sample consists of α-Al, Al 4Mn and Al 6Mn phases. The 

diffraction results (Fig. 2b) acquired along the scan path show that the diffraction peaks are 

different in positions and intensity, indicating that the nucleation, growth and transition of the 

phases occurred independently at different locations within the melt volume . There was no 

directional growth behaviour found in the solidification process, which was in consistent with 

the observation of the phases ’ spatial distribution in 3D from the tomography (Figs. 2c , 2d and 

Fig.3 ). The diffractio n patterns in the other 12 points have the similar cha racteristics and 

therefore are not repeated here. 8

Fig. 2. (a) The scan path (direction) of the diffraction beam inside the imaging FOV. (b1) to (b3) Three diffraction intensity spectra of 3 typical 

points in Figs. 2a ( more clearly marked in d1). (c1) to (c5) The top cross -sectional views of typical tomography scans collected immediately after 

each full set of diffraction scan (i.e. , 5 × 3 points) during the solidification process. (d1) to (d5) The f ront cross -sectional views according to the 

black dashed line in Fig. 2c1. Please see Video 1 for the dynamic evolution .9

Figs. 3a to 3f show the 3D rendered results of the Al -Mn intermetallics in the entire scanned 

volume. Although the 2D tomography slices show these intermetallics as individual polygonal 

structures, in 3D space, they were actually long rod -shaped structures impinged or crossed 

over each other during solidification , forming extremely complex truss structures. Fig. 3g 

shows the phase volume fraction as a function of temperature measured from the 3D datasets .

The calculated volume fraction using the Scheil -Gull iver model in JMatPro® (v13.2) is also 

shown for comparison [42] . The measure d fractions were in agreement with the Scheil -Gulliver 

model in the early stage of solidification (7 60 -710 °C ) but deviated more in the later stage. In 

the following sections, w e extracted some representative cases (typical morphologies ) from 

the whole volume to discuss and elaborate on the phase growth and transition dynamics. 

Fig. 3. (a) to (f) the Al -Mn intermetallics rendered from the acquired tomography data , showing 

the total phase volume as a function of temperature . (g) The measured Al -Mn phase volume 

fraction versus that calculated by using the Scheil -Gulliver model in JMatPro® (v13.2). 

3.2.  Growth dynamics of the primary Al 4Mn phase and formation of core defects 

Fig. 4 shows the morphological evolution in 3D for 3 different but typical Al 4Mn phases (named 

V1 , V2 and V3) and the formation of core defects in solidific ation from 7 60 °C to 7 06 °C (i.e., 

prior to the peritectic reaction ). For case V1, Fig. 4a and Video 2 show that a rod -shaped long 

Al 4Mn phase (8.1 μm in diameter, 513 μm in length) was seen to appear in the FOV. Firstly, it 

grew rapidly along the axial direction (the vertical direction) with an average speed of 3.9 μm/s 

(Figs. 4d to f) until its growing front was intercepted and obstructed by an Al 4Mn phase that 

grew in the horizontal direction (see the phase marked by H1 in the inset of Fig. 4a). Such 

obstruction forced V1’s growing front to split into two smaller branches , which continued to 

grow in the same direction until once again each of them was impeded by H2, then H3, etc. 10 

each such obstruction forced more split and therefore more branches (see the top inset in Fig. 

4a). At the same time, V1 also grew radially, but with a much slow er speed of only 0.0 56 μm/s 

(~70 times slower than the axial growth speed, see Fig. 4f). Fig. 4b and Video 3 show the case 

V2. Initially, it exhibited a typical hexagonal prism shape (~40 μm in width, ~395 μm in length). 

It grew in the axial direction ( 2.6 μm/s) and radial direction (0.1 7 μm/s) without any obstruction 

(Fig. 4f). However, a number of core defects developed at the growing front, and gradually 

such defects grew bigger and bigger and then merged to form large tubular core structures 

(see the top insets in Fig. 4b). 

Fig. 4. (a) to (c) Morphological evolution in 3D for 3 typical Al 4Mn phases of different sizes 

(named V1, V2 and V3, respectively) during solidification, showing the growth dynamics in the 

axial direction and radial direction respectively (Videos 2, 3 and 4 show more vividly the growth 

dynamics). (d) The axial length and (e) radial width growth of the 3 phases as a function of 

time and temperature. (f) Growth velocity of the 3 phases in the axial and radial direction. 11 

Fig. 4c and Video 4 show th e case V3 . It started with a n incomplete hexagonal prism shape 

(~ 200 μm in length, ~103 μm in width, first appeared in the FOV at 760 °C ) with a distinct core 

defect inside the hexagon . Again, due to the obstruction s by the phases growing from other 

directions , the top surface of the prism split into several platelets that continued to grow axially 

like the behaviour of V 1 in Fig. 4a. The average growth speed of V3 was ~ 3.1 μm/s in the axial 

direction and ~0. 26 μm/s in the radial directions respectively (Fig. 4f). 

3.3.  Solute diffusion and redistribution during growth of the primary Al 4Mn phases 

To understand the effect of solute Mn diffusion and distribution on the phase growth dynamics, 

we extracted the Mn solute distribution information based on the variation of the grey values 

in the tomographic slices . The correlation and calibration were established using the 

composition line scan from the energy dispersive X -ray spectroscopy (EDXS ) measurements 

as detailed in the section s 2-4 of the Supplementary Materials. Such calibration established a 

linear relationship between the grey value (G) and Mn concentration as :

𝑪 𝑴𝒏 = 𝟎 . 𝟏𝟑𝟑 𝑮 − 𝟖 . 𝟐𝟗𝟔  (1) 

which was then applied to the tomography slices to map the Mn distribution surrounding the 

growing Al 4Mn phases (Figs. 5a to c) . The solute Mn distribution information is critical for 

understanding the subsequent peritectic reaction and phase growth dynamics .

Fig. 5. In the 1 st row of (a) to (c) : typical tomography 2D slices of V1, V2 and V3 at the cross -

sections indicated by the shaded squares in Figs. 4a to c . In the 2 nd row of (a) to (c) : the 

corresponding pseudo -colour X-ray attenuation maps. (d) to (f) The Mn distribution profiles 

along the white dash lines in the pseudo -colour maps . The phase centre is set as zero position .

Figs. 5d to f show the Mn distribution profiles across the liquid -solid -liquid interface of the three 

representative Al 4Mn phases (i.e., V1, V2, V3 in Fig. 4). In the liquid region (the green colour 

region) away from the liquid -solid interface , the Mn concentration maintained at ~5.0 at.% with 

relatively flat profiles for all 3 cases , followed by a pronounced Mn -depleted zone in the liquid 12 

region (the blue colour region) near the interface . However, mov ing into the solid region (the 

red and then yellow colour region), there we re sharp increase s in Mn concentrations at the 

outer edges of the solid ified Al 4Mn phase . Such steep Mn concentration changes were 

constrained within the liquid -to -solid transition zone with its thickness measured at ~5 μm (as 

indicated by the purple shaded area in Figs. 5 d, e and f ), which are very consistent for all 3

cases . The formation of such Mn -enriched zone in front of the solid -liquid interface also 

simultaneously creat ed a solute -depleted zone in the immediate liquid region . As solidification 

proceed ed and temperature decrease d, Mn depletion in the immediate liquid region bec ame 

more prominent (Figs. 5d to f). Clearly, this thin Mn diffusion zone is controlling the growth 

dynamics of the Al 4Mn phases from the liquid region. 

3.4.  Peritectic reaction dynamics (Al 4Mn + liquid → Al 6Mn ) and phase spatial 

relationships 

According to the Al -Mn phase diagram (Fig. S1), t he peritectic reaction (Al 4Mn + liquid → Al 6Mn) 

occurred at ~70 5 °C (Fig. 6a). Fig s. 6b and c show the typical primary Al 4Mn phase . Figs. 6 d

and e show the resulting peritectic phase (Al 6Mn). The Al 6Mn phases grew into irregular and 

rugged strip -shaped structures on the interior and exterior facets of the Al 4Mn phases, forming 

a complex cauliflower -shaped morphology . Video 5 shows more vividly the peritectic reaction 

dynamics. In fact, the spatial relationship between the Al 6Mn and the Al 4Mn in 3D view (Fig s.

6d and e) is far more complicated than that illustrated by the 2D sectional view s (compared 

the sectional views shown by Fig s. 6f1 and f2 with the corresponding real 3D structures shown 

by Fig s. 6g1 to g 4). 

In order to determine the spatial relationships between the Al 4Mn and Al 6Mn, Figs. 6f and g 

present a rendered peritectic structure in 3D along with two 2D slices in the chosen locations. 

A thin shell structure in blue colour tightly wrapped around the reddish precursors. Such thin 

shell was the direct product of the peritectic reaction (the region marked by the red lines in 

Figs. 6f1 and f2). In fact, in a non -equilibrium solidification condition, the Al 4Mn was not able 

to fully transform into Al 6Mn. The n on -uniform solute distribution and phase impingement 

resulted in an irregular outer surface morphology for the Al 6Mn phases. In addition, there 

existed some prism -shaped structures that grew epitaxially into the melts (see the blue line 

circulated areas in Figs. 6f1 and f2). 3D view indicates clearly that these structures also have 

pronounced anisotropic growth behavi ours (Figs. 6g1 to g4), i.e., they grew more quickly along 

one particular direction and eventually formed long prism -shaped structures. Intere stingly, at 

the centres of these Al 6Mn phases, there were also distinct regions filled with α-Al phases and 

these regions grew bigger and bigger as the phase grew (Figs. 6g2 and g4), similar to those 

observed in case V2 of Fig. 4b. 13 

Fig. 6. (a) The synchrotron X -ray diffraction spectr a, showing the phase transformation . (b) 

and (c) 3D rendered views of a typical peritectic precursor (Al 4Mn) . (d) and ( e) The resulting 

peritectic structure in 3D along with two 2D planes at the chosen locations, showing the spatial 

relationship between the peritectic precursor (Al 4Mn) and the resulting product (Al 6Mn). ( f1) 

and ( f2 ) The enlarged 2D tomography slices corresponding to the two planes shown in Fig. 

6e . ( g1) to ( g4) 3D rendered results of the prism -shaped Al 6Mn phases growing epitaxially into 

the melts, showing a pronounced anisotropic growth behaviour with core defect s formed at 

the centre. 

3.5.  Crystallographic o rientation relationship s between the peritectic precursors and 

products 

Previous research show ed that the crystallographic orientations of the peritectic products are 

definitely related to the orientation of the precursors [7, 43] . Here, we used electron 

backscattered diffraction (EBSD ) coupled with ED XS to further analyse the coupled peritectic 

structures of the fully solidified alloy sample , as detailed in the section 5 of the Supplementary 

Materials . The overlaid phase map and elemental distribution maps (Fig s. 7a to d ) confirm that 

the inner region ( red ) was HCP Al 4Mn phase with lower Al and a higher Mn, while the outer 

region (blue) was orthorhombic Al 6Mn phase (see Table 2) .14 

Fig. 7. (a) SEM image , showing the coupled peritectic structures of the fully solidified sample .

(b) Phase map overla id with band contrast map . The red part is indexed as Al 4Mn phases, and 

the blue part is indexed as Al 6Mn phase. (c) and (d) ED XS element map of Al and Mn. (e) and 

(f) Pole figures and i nverse pole figures of the two phases .

Table 2. The chemical compositions of the Al 4Mn and Al 6Mn phases measured by EDXS. 

Phase  Al (at.%)  Mn (at.%) 

Al 4Mn  81.42 ± 0.02  18.58 ± 0.04 

Al 6Mn  85.88 ± 0.05  14.12 ± 0.05 

We also analysed and determined the orientations of the coupled peritectic structures. In order 

to clearly elucidate the orientation relationships, the coordinate system of the samples was 

adjusted in the virtual chamber to allow the basal plane (i.e., {0001}) of the Al 4Mn phase to be 

horizontally perpendicular to the screen. Figs. 7e and f show the adjusted pole figures and 

inverse pole figures of the Al 4Mn (top) and the Al 6Mn (bottom) phases, respectively. By 

comparison, we can clearly see that the pole of the Al 6Mn phases is mostly located at the 

centre of the {110} pole figure, which just corresponds to the centre of the {10 -10} polar figure 

of the Al 4Mn phases (as indicated by the white rectangles in Fig. 7e), and also the pole in the 

[001] direction on its inverse pole figures likewise corresponds to that in the [0001] direction 

of the Al 4Mn phase (as indicated by the black circles in Fig. 7f). The highly overlapping poles 

undoubtedly demonstrate the existence of a specific crystallographic orientation relationship 15 

between the peritectic precursor ( HCP Al 4Mn phase ) and its product ( orthorhombic Al 6Mn 

phase ), i.e., {10 -10} HCP // {110} O, [0001] HCP // [001] O.

4.  Discussion 

4.1.  Nucleation and anisotropic growth dynamics of the primary Al 4Mn phase s

Our previous studies have sh ow n that solute and solvent atoms in Al alloy melts gradually 

rearrange to formed polyhedral atomic clusters of a certain degree of crystalline -type order by 

overcoming the lower solid -liquid interfac ial energy barrier during solidification [28, 44] . These 

polyhedral atomic clusters with high er degree of crystalline symmetry ar e proved to be the 

nucleation “precursors” for the mature crystals in the liquid -solid coexisting region [28, 35] .

According to the classic nucleation theory [45] , once the nucleation “precursors” overcome the 

free -energy barrier at a critical nucleus size, they would grow out to form mature crystallites in 

the heterogeneous liquid (Fig. 8a1) . Following on nucleation, the newly formed crystallites 

move onto the growth stag e, where they mature into smooth faceted macroscopic or rough 

non -faceted dendritic crystals [46] .

Based on our diffraction (Fig. 2b) and tomography results (Fig s. 2 c1 and d1 ), the Al 4Mn phases 

are crystallized primarily from the melt when the temperature drop s below the liquidus 

temperature (~7 60 °C for Al -8wt.%Mn alloy ), followed by the formation of Al 6Mn phases via a 

peritectic reaction at ~705 °C. The tomography results demonstrate that both Al 4Mn and Al 6Mn 

phases gr ow into elongated prism -shaped structures enclosed by smooth facets (Figs. 4 and 

6), demonstrating a pronounced anisotropic faceted growth behaviour. Theoretically, an ideal 

bulk crystal may possess an infinite number of exposed faces . However, the actual grown 

crystals possess a limited number of exposed faces [47] . In general, the morphology of a 

growing crystal is mainly determined by the intrinsic crystallographic kinetics and the external 

thermodynamic conditions [17] . The former affects the growth dynamics along certain 

crystallographic planes and directions , in particular for the crystals with high anisotropy. 

Table 3 lists the interplanar distances of the most common crystal planes of Al 4Mn and Al 6Mn 

phases. Al 4Mn phase with an HCP crystal structure has the largest interplanar distance of 

2.4673 nm along the basal plane (0001) and the second with 1.7303 nm along the prismatic 

plane (10 1̅0). Therefore, the <0001> direction (i.e., along the c -axis, perpendicular to the basal 

plane) is relatively loosely packed, with weaker atomic bonding between layers , hence having 

lower energy barrier for atomic attachment. In contrast, the <10 1̅0> direction (i.e., along the 

a-axis, perpendicular to the prismatic plane) is more tightly packed, with stronger in -plane 

atomic coordination, leading to a higher kinetic barrier for growth. Consequently, atoms (or 

atomic clusters) from the melt attach more easily and grow along the <0001> direction, 16 

resulting in a much faster intrinsic growth rate compared to the more constrained <10 1̅0> 

direction (see Figs. 8a2 and a3). 

Fig. 8. Schematic representation of the nucleation and growth mechanisms : (a1) to (a4) for 

the Al 4Mn phases , (b1) to (b6) for the Al 6Mn phases. (c) and (d) The evolutionary mechanism 

of the peritectic reaction. ( e) A representative peritectic structure extracted from the volume, 

showing the intertangled truss morphology in the 3D vie w. Please also see Video 5 for more 

detailed dynamics. 

Furthermore, in accord ance with the Wulff construction theorem [48] , a growing crystal always 

requires minimizing its total surface energy for a given crystal volume [47] . In most intermetallic 

growth cases, a growing crystal would be bounded by the faces with the largest interplanar 17 

distances and lowest surface energies, eventually resulting in the formation of anisotropic 

faceted morphology [47, 49, 50] . To minimize the total energy, the Al 4Mn crystal therefore 

grows preferentially along the <0001> direction, reducing the area of the higher -energy 

prismatic faces. This directional preference leads to the development of elongated prismatic 

morphologies with high aspect ratio , as observed in Figs. 4 and 8a4 .

Table 3. The interplanar distances of some crystal planes of Al 4Mn and Al 6Mn phases [51] .

Planes in Al 4Mn  Interplanar distance/nm  Planes in Al 6Mn  Interplanar distance /nm 

(0001)  2.4673  (001)  0.8870 

(10 1̅0)  1.7303  (100)  0.7550 

(10 1̅1)  1.4167  (010)  0.6500 

(10 1̅2)  1.0045  (110)  0.4926 

(11 2̅0)  0.9990  (111)  0.4306 

In solidification, anisotropic crystal growth is also influenced by the thermodynamic conditions, 

including solute diffusion, heat transfer , cooling rate, and solute rejected fields caused by the 

competitive growth between adjacent crystals [25] . More importantly, our experiments 

reveal ed that there exist s a thin Mn -rich diffusion boundary layer (~5 μm thick , with a deeper 

depletion in the liquid side and higher supersaturation in the solid side , see Fig. 5) . It 

establish es a local solute gradient that controls and dominate s the growth kinetic s at the liquid -

solid interface , making the Al 4Mn growth dynamics have a typical diffusion -controlled 

characteristics . Clearly, i n the radial direction (i.e.,  <10 1̅0> ), accumulation of the Mn atoms 

within this thin layer create s a barrier to slow down (or stop) any further solute diffusion in the 

radial direction , hence very slow growth in the radial direction initially and then completely 

terminated . Conversely, along the fastest -growing axial direction (i.e., <0001>), the high 

growth velocity prevent s the establishment of a similar solute boundary layer at the tip, 

allowing the crystal to outrun the solute -depleted region and maintain sustained longitudinal 

growth (see Figs. 4 to 6). Such diffusion -controlled growth dynamics also explained well the 

observed discrepancy between the experimentally measured phase volume fraction and that 

calculated by using the Scheil -Gulliver model (Fig. 3g). The Scheil model assumes a complete 

and homogeneous solute diffusion in the liquid state . However, in our experiments, the 

pronounced Mn -depleted zone in the liquid side at the solid -liquid interface effectively change s

the local solute concentration , suppressing the nucleation probability in the liquid region further 

away from the growing phases, thus effectively reduc ing the total phase volume fraction at the 

later stages of solidification .

4.2.  Nucleation and growth dynamics of the peritectic Al 6Mn phases 18 

4.2.1.  Nucleation and a nisotrop ic growth 

The Al 6Mn phase ha s an orthorhombic structure and the interplanar distance of the (001), 

(100), and (010) plane is 0.887 nm, 0.755 nm, and 0.650 nm , respectively . Therefore, the 

growth rate along the direction [i.e., <001> of (001) ] plane will be greater than that on the (100) 

and (010) planes (Figs. 8b2 and b3). Similarly, due to crystal anisotropy, the Al 6Mn crystal 

continue d to grow radially along the direction [i.e., <110> of the (110) ] plane in order to reduce 

the total surface energy of the growing crystal (Figs. 8b4 and b5), developin g into a tetragonal 

prism -shaped morphology .

4.2.2.  Re -nucleation and non -anisotropic b ranching 

In addition, at the edges and/or corners of the growing phase fronts during the growth of the 

Al 6Mn phases, re -nucleation and phase branching ar e often found to occur as highlighted by 

the red circles in Fig. 8b6 . The branching dynamics are driven by the competit ion between 

thermodynamic instability and crystallographic kinetics. From thermodynamic point of view ,

the flat and smooth crystal facets have the lowest surface energy and are thus 

thermodynamically more stab le . However, the edges and corners are fo rmed due to two or 

multiple crystal planes intersect ion , and are the sites of high curvature and higher interfacial 

energy, making them energetically unfavourabl e [52] . To reduce the interfac ial energy at those 

sites , these high -energy sites become preferential locations for phase re -nucleation. The 

newly nucleated crystals may also change their crystallographic orientation , either align 

coherently or semi -coherently with that of the existing phase in order to promote 

crystallographic continuity and therefore reduce the surface free energy at the junctions [52] .

From the kinetic point of view , the incomplete progress of peritectic reaction and the 

preferential growth of Al 6Mn crystals lead to local solute redistribution in the melt, particularly ,

the Mn concentration is consumed largely near the growth front , creat ing a solute -depleted 

region ahead of the liquid side of the solid -liquid interface and a concentration gradient near 

the corners and edges [17] . These areas experience significant solute gradient , increasing the 

driving force for nucleation of new Al 6Mn crystals. Once a new crystal nucleates at the high -

energy sites (corners or edges), it begins to grow along its favourable crystallographic 

directions , which in turn change s the local solute concentration nearby , potentially triggering 

other re -nucleation event s closely . Thus, the Al 6Mn growth front undergo es repetitive cycles 

of local solute gradient , re -nucleation, re -growth, and termination . Eventually, the Al 6Mn 

phases grow into complex dendritic or multi -segmented anisotropic structure or morphology 

as illustrated in Figs. 6 and 8b6. 

4.3.  Growth dynamics of the peritectic phases at a low cooling rate 19 

Through the above analyses, we have elaborated clearly the nucleation and growth 

mechanisms of the primary Al 4Mn phases and peritectic Al 6Mn phases , as well as their 

compositional, spatial and orientation relationships . From these new findings, we can reveal 

clearly the growth dynamics of the peritectic phases at the cooling rate of 10 °C/min 

(~0.17 °C/s) , as illustrated in Fig s. 8c to e and Video 5 .

Firstly, when a primary Al 4Mn phase is formed and gr ows into a certain size, a stable Mn -

enriched diffusion boundary layer (~5 μm thick ) is created at the solid -liquid interface (see Fig. 

5). This local region, with the Mn concentration significantly higher than that in the bulk liquid, 

play s the dominant role in controlling the subsequent peritectic phase transformation. At the 

peritectic temperature, nucleation of Al 6Mn on the Al 4Mn surfaces occurs in direct contact with 

the melt (Fig. 8a4 ). Theoretically, nucleation would occur anywhere on the solid -liquid interface 

[44] . However, the established Mn -enriched boundary layer provides the favourable surface 

for nucleation [44] . Crucially, such direct nucleation on top of the Al 4Mn phase surface enables 

the newly formed Al 6Mn phase to follow the specific orientation relationship: {10 1̅0} HCP // {110} O,

[0001] HCP // [001] O (see Fig. 8c) . This low -energy and crystallographic orientation coupl ing 

allow s the direct peritectic products to form a thin, continuous shell structure surrounding the 

primary Al 4Mn phase (Figs. 6b1 and b2). 

The subsequent growth of the peritectic Al 6Mn phases is critically constrained by the geometry 

and solute mass of this boundary layer. The initial shell morphology is a direct consequence 

of the thin Mn -rich layer. As the local ly rich Mn in the boundary layer is rapidly consumed, 

further growth of the Al 6Mn phase s requires long -range diffusion of Mn from the solute -

depleted bulk liquid to arrive at the growing front of the newly formed Al 6Mn shells. Such Mn 

diffusion is impossible to occur along the radial direction once a complete Al 6Mn shell is formed, 

hence the growth in the radial direction stop s after a Al 6Mn shell is formed (see Fig s. 4e and 

f). while in the axial direction, Mn depletion in the remaining melt would slow down the Mn 

diffusion , hence the phase growth in axial direction also slow s down (see Fig s. 4d and f). Such 

diffusion -controlled process render s, in most situation, an incomplete peritectic reaction. 

Further melt cooling provided more driving force, promoting more re -nucleation events to 

occur at the energetically favourable edges and corners of the hindered growing fronts (Fig. 

8d ). The se re -nucleated crystals will grow epitaxially in to the melt , forming branched structures .

Consequently , the final microstructures exhibit intertangled truss morphology in 3D (Fig. 8e ).

4.4.  Nucleation and growth dynamics of the core defects 

Another interesting phenomenon is that the formation of core defects within both the Al 4Mn 

and Al 6Mn phases during their growth process. These defects emerge along the growth axis 

and evolve into tubular core structures as shown more clearly in Fig. 9.20 

Fig. 9. Typical tomography and slices, illustrating the form ation and evolution of core defects 

at the phase centre (α-Al phases are removed to highlight the morpholog ies of the Al -Mn 

intermetallic phases and defect s) . (a) A series of 2D slices of the Al 4Mn phase along the 

growth direction and (b) the corresponding phase in 3D. (c) 2D slices of the Al 6Mn phase and 

(d) the corresponding phase in 3D. The regions with low er attenuation are shown in blue and 

green, which normally mean a higher concentration of light elements or void (i.e. Al or hole ). 

While yellow to red regions contains heavier elements (i.e., Mn), where the X -ray attenuation 

was strong [53, 54] .

During the solidification process, both Al 4Mn and Al 6Mn phases exhibit faceted and uniaxial 

growth, primarily along their preferential crystallographic directions (Figs. 9b and d). However, 

due to the anisotropic diffusion, i.e., the long -range solute transport along the growing axis is 

significantly slower than the lateral feeding from the melt . Hence, the solute (Mn) supply at the 

centre of the growing front tip bec ome s more and more depleted as the phase continued to 

grow longer . Meanwhile, when the growing fronts encounter spatial obstructions or 21 

neighbouring crystals (e.g., the H1 - H3 phases in Fig. 4a), this local ly mechanical 

impingement creates significant strain mismatch across the crystal facets, disrupting the 

ordered atomic stacking specifically at the central region where the solute flux is already 

restricted [55, 56] . In addition, the rapid crystallisation along the growing direction release 

significant laten t heat at the liquid -solid interface . The latent heat at the outer surface may be 

dissipated into the melt, but the latent heat released at the inner surface (see Fig s. 4c and 5c )

may not be able to be dissipated easily , instead would act as the extra heat energy to remelt 

the trapped Al inside the core [56, 57] , creating tiny liquid melt -filled channel s along the 

crystal’s growth axis. As solidification proceeds, the channel expands longitudinally along the 

growth directions and finally evolves into large and irregular channels that may contain some 

void if no sufficient liquid to back -fill that region (see Fig. 9). The channel s actually co -grow 

with the phases . Similar phenomena ha ve been reported in the anisotropic growth of various 

intermetallic phases, such as Al 2Cu [58] , Al 3Sc [59] , Al 3Ni [56] , and Cu 6Sn 5 [57] , etc. What we 

have found here is that the nucleation and growth of the axial channels occur in both primary 

Al 4Mn and peritectic Al 6Mn phases, indicating that it is driven by the growth dynamics instead 

of nucleation and independent on the type of phase reaction . More importantly , unlike most 

previous studies based on post -mortem 2D microscopy characterisation , our studies are 

carried out in real -time and in 3D space , avoiding any ambiguity. 

4.5.  Effect of cooling rate on the growth dynamics and 3D structures of the peritectic 

phase s

Cooling rate has profound influence on t he thermodynamic and kinetic pathway of solidification 

and the final microstructure s [14, 60] . Fig. 1 0 and Video 6 show the representative 3D 

rendered views along with 2D tomography slices at chosen locations for the samples solidified 

at cooling rates of ~0.17 °C/s (Fig. 1 0a), ~2 .0 °C/s (Fig. 1 0b), and ~20 °C/s (Fig. 1 0c). The 

evolution of microstructure s across these conditions vividly illustrates a transition from fully 

faceted to partly faceted and finally to non -faceted growth behaviour .

At the slow cooling rate of ~0.17 °C/s (Fig. 10a), the system is kinetically permitted to evolve 

towards its thermodynamic minimum. The Al 6Mn phases develop into large and well -defined 

tetragonal prisms with high aspect ratios, as sufficient time allows for the atomic 

rearrangement and interface migration governed by anisotropic interfacial energy . The 

pronounced and continuous tubular channels are evident along the growth axes (as shown in 

the accompanying 2D slices in Fig. 1 0a), a signature of sustained anisotropic solute diffusion, 

impurity and latti ce mismatch -induced strain accumulation/relaxation, as detailed in section 

4.3. 22 

Fig. 1 0. (a –c) 3D reconstructions and corresponding 2D tomography slices of typical peritectic 

structures from Al -8wt% Mn alloys solidified at cooling rates of: (a) ~0.17 °C/s, (b) ~2 .0 °C/s, 

and (c) ~20 °C/s. See Video 6 for appreciating the true 3D morphology of these peritectic 

structures when viewing from different angles. 

With an increase in the cooling rate to ~2.0 °C/s (Fig. 1 0b), a partly faceted morphology is 

observed (an intermediate regime ). This is because the increased cooling rates dis rupts the 

stability of the solute diffusion layer at the solid -liquid interface. In this regime , solid -liquid 

interface becomes unstable, and protrusions appear at the growing fronts, leading to a more 

frequent branching growth behaviour [17, 57, 61] . Concurrently, the kinetic effect start s to have 

influence because the time available for the peritectic reaction and coupled growth is reduced, 

resulting in smaller and chain -shape d peritectic Al 6Mn phases with less perfect facets. The 

defects appear more fragmented and less regular, as the accelerated growth front outstrips 

the defect propagation speed. 

Under the fast -cooling condition of ~20 °C/s (Fig. 1 0c), despite the very high thermodynamic 

driving force, the extremely short time prevent any sufficient solute diffusion to occur , hence 

the Mn -rich boundary necessary for sustain ing the growth of A l6Mn shells cannot be 

established . Hence, the Al 6Mn phase is forced to nucleate repeatedly and independently from 

the undercooled and solute -fluctuating melt [61] . This leads to much higher number of phase s

branching out with smaller and refined size (see Fig. 1 0c). The formed phases are much more 

segmented and rugged . The branches tangled together and most of them do not have 

sufficient time to follow a specific orientation relationship during growth . At such colling rate ,

the rapid ly solidif ying front disrupt ed any sustained solute and impurity accumulation that is 

necessary to initiate and maintain the formation of defect s, hence these defects were largely 23 

suppressed . Therefore, cooling rate is one param ount processing parameter for controlling 

the peritectic phase size, orientation, morphology and defect formation .

5.  Conclusion 

Using quasi -simultaneous synchrotron X -ray diffraction and tomography , supplemented by 

EBSD and EDXS analysis , we have systematically studied in -situ and in real -time the 

nucleation and co -growth dynamics of the coupled peritectic phases in an Al -8wt% Mn alloy 

during the solidification process . The research provides a comprehensive 4D (3D space + time) 

dataset that help to reveal the underlying mechanisms of the peritectic reaction , in particular 

the critical role of the ~5 μm solute -rich boundary in the formation of the peritectic structures 

and the core defects . The results demonstrate that the final complex microstructure is not a 

random occurrence but is the deterministic outcome of a sequential process. The key finding s

of this research are: 

(1)  The primary Al 4Mn phases (HCP structure ) exhibit ed pronounced anisotropic grow th 

kinetics . The growth rate wa s ~70 times higher along the <0001> direction than that 

along the <1  1̅ 00> direction , forming long hexagonal prisms at a cooling rate of 

10 °C/min (~0.17 °C/s) . A diffusion -controlled Mn -rich solute boundary layer with a 

thickness of ~5 μm was formed at the liquid -solid interface , serv ing as the precursor 

for growing the peritectic phase .

(2)  At the peritectic reaction , the Al 6Mn phase (orthorhombic structure) was epitaxial ly 

nucleat ed at the ~5 μm boundary layer in the slow cooling rate condition . The Al 6Mn 

phases grew into thin shell surrounding the Al 4Mn with the orientation relationship of 

{10 1̅0} HCP // {110} O, [0001] HCP // [001] O. Once the locally enriched Mn solute is depleted, 

the Al 6Mn phase may nucleat e and branch out at the edges and/or corners of the 

growing phase fronts, forming tetragonal prism -shaped structures that no longer follow 

the initial orientation relationship . The anisotropic solute diffusion also led to the 

formation of core defect s at the growing centre of both Al 4Mn and Al 6Mn phases. 

Consequently, the final microstructures exhibit intertangled truss morphology in 3D. 

(3)  Cooling rate was the most critical parameter in driving the transition from a faceted to 

a non -faceted growth dynamic . With 0.17 °C/s, the peritectic structures ha d large and 

well -faceted morphologies with tubular defect s along the growth ax is. When the 

cooling rate was in the range of 2-20 °C/s, stable solute diffusion at the liquid -solid 

interface was disrupted , result ing in the formation of more refined, non -faceted, and 

rugged dendritic structures, with defects becoming further suppressed. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 24 

I declare that there is no conflict of interest among all authors concerning the submitted 

manuscript. 

Acknowledgements 

We would like to acknowledge the funding and financial supports given by the UK Engineering 

and Physical Science Research Council (EP/L019965/1), the National Natural Science 

Foundation of China (52104373) and Yunnan International Cooperation Base in Cloud 

Computation for Non -ferrous Metal Processing (202203AE140011). We also would like to 

acknowledge the allocation of synchrotron X -ray beam time (MG31637) on the DIAD beamline 

(K11) and electron beam time (MG 35828 ) on the ePSIC beamline of the Diamond Light Source ,

UK, in particular Mr Matt Spink and Dr Mohsen Danaie , the free access to the University of 

Hull Supercomputer, Viper and the strong support from the technical team, in particular Mr 

Chris Collins. K. Xiang and Y. Wang would also like to acknowledge the financial support from 

the University of Hull and China Scholarship Council for their PhD studies at the University of 

Hul l (202108500033 and 20220850023 ).

References 

[1] J. Wang, S. Pan, Y. Li, X. Shen, Q. Zhang, D. Jia, A phase -field study of the peritectic 

reaction mechanisms in Fe -Ni alloys, Computational Materials Science 230 (2023). 

[2] W. Wang, Z. An, S. Luo, M. Zhu, In -situ observation of peritectic solidification of Fe -Mn -Al -

C steel with medium manganese, Journal of Alloys and Compounds 909 (2022). 

[3] F.C. Campbell, Peritectic Alloy Systems, Phase Diagrams: Understanding the Basics, ASM 

International, Ohio (2012). 

[4] P. Peng, A. Zhang, J. Yue, S. Li, W. Zheng, L. Lu, Investigation on peritectic solidification 

in Sn -Ni peritectic alloys through in -situ observation, Journal of Materials Science &

Technology 90 (2021) 236 -242. 

[5] B. Gao, X. Meng, E. Guo, H. Liang, Z. Cao, T. Wang, Effects of Ni on the nucleation and 

growth behavior of Cu6Sn5 in Sn –8.5Cu alloy: An in situ observation, Journal of Alloys and 

Compounds 862 (2021). 

[6] P. Lü, H.P. Wang, B. Wei, Competitive nucleation and growth between the primary and 

peritectic phases of rapidly solidifying Ni –Zr hypoperitectic alloy, Metallurgical and Materials 

Transactions A 50(2) (2018) 789 -803. 

[7] M. Dong, T. Liu, X. Guo, S. Dong, L. Li, J. Wang, J. Li, L. Zhao, Q. Wang, Crystal orientation 

induced by high magnetic fields during peritectic reaction of alloys, Materials Characterization 

183 (2022). 25 

[8] J. Yan, T. Liu, J. Liao, J. Sun, X. Guo, Z. Ren, Q. Wang, Microstructural evolution and solute 

migration in the mushy zone of peritectic Al -18 at. pct Ni alloy in high magnetic fields, 

Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A 52(2) (2021) 726 -740. 

[9] J.M. Liu, W. Zhai, B.J. Wang, X. Ma, P.X. Yan, B. Wei, Structure and property modulation 

of primary CoSn and peritectic CoSn2 intermetallic compounds through ultrasonicating liquid 

Sn –10%Co alloy, Journal of Alloys and Compounds 827 (2020). 

[10] H. Yasuda, K. Morishita, M. Yoshiya, T. Narumi, Transformation from ferrite to austenite 

during/after solidification in peritectic steel systems: an X -ray imaging study, ISIJ International 

60(12) (2020) 2755 -2764. 

[11] B. Grushko, S. Balanetskyy, A study of phase equilibria in the Al -rich part of the Al -Mn 

alloy system, International Journal of Materials Research 99(12) (2008) 1319 -1323. 

[12] M. Musi, G. Graf, H. Clemens, P. Spoerk -Erdely, Alloying Elements in Intermetal lic  γ‐ TiAl 

Based Alloys  – A Review on Their Influence on Phase Equilibria and Phase Transformations, 

Advanced Engineering Materials 26(4) (2023). 

[13] H. Okamoto, Sb -Zn (Antimony -Zinc), Journal of Phase Equilibria and Diffusion 29(3) 

(2008) 290 -290. 

[14] Z. Chen, Y. Hou, B. Xie, Q. Zhang, Dendrite morphology evolution of Al(6)Mn phase in 

suction casting Al -Mn alloys, Materials (Basel) 13(10) (2020). 

[15] Y. Wang, D. Freiberg, Y. Huo, W. Zhu, R. Williams, M. Li, Y. Wang, Shapes of nano Al6Mn 

precipitates in Mn -containing Al -alloys, Acta Materialia 249 (2023). 

[16] F. Czerwinski, Thermal stability of aluminum alloys, Materials 13(15) (2020) 3441. 

[17] H. Kang, X. Li, Y. Su, D. Liu, J. Guo, H. Fu, 3 -D morphology and growth mechanism of 

primary Al6Mn intermetallic compound in directionally solidified Al -3at.%Mn alloy, 

Intermetallics 23 (2012) 32 -38. 

[18] Y.N. Mansurov, J.U. Rakhmonov, Analysis of the phase composition and the structure of 

aluminum alloys with increased content of impurities, Non -ferrous Metals (2018) 37 -42. 

[19] D. Song, Y. Zhao, Y. Jia, X. Li, Y. Fu, W. Zhang, Synergistic effects of Mn and B on iron -

rich intermetallic modification of recycled Al alloy, Journal of Materials Research and 

Technology 24 (2023) 527 -541. 

[20] J. Zou, H. Zhang, C. Yu, Z. Wu, C. Guo, H. Nagaumi, K. Zhu, B. Li, J. Cui, Investigating 

the influences of Fe, Mn and Mo additions on the evolution of microstructure and mechanical 

performances of Al –Si –Mg cast alloys, Journal of Materials Research an d Technology 25 

(2023) 319 -332. 

[21] C. Cao, D. Chen, J. Ren, J. Shen, L. Meng, J. Liu, Improved strength and enhanced pitting 

corrosion resistance of Al -Mn alloy with Zr addition, Materials Letters 255 (2019). 26 

[22] K. Xiang, S. Huang, J. Mi, Characterisations of the Al -Mn intermetallic phases formed 

under pulse magnetic fields solidification, IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and 

Engineering 1274(1) (2023). 

[23] W. He, Y. Zhao, B. Gan, J. Lai, H. Liu, Q. Wei, D. Song, C. Song, D. Zheng, Z. Sun, Y. Fu, 

W. Zhang, Effect of Mn on the primary Fe -rich phases formation and thermal conductivity of 

Al -3Fe alloys, Journal of Alloys and Compounds 1039 (2025). 

[24] M. Oehring, D. Matthiessen, M. Blankenburg, N. Schell, F. Pyczak, An in situ high ‐energy 

synchrotron X ‐ray diffraction study of directional solidification in binary TiAl alloys, Advanced 

Engineering Materials 23(11) (2021). 

[25] K. Xiang, L. Qin, Y. Zhao, S. Huang, W. Du, E. Boller, A. Rack, M. Li, J. Mi, Operando 

study of the dynamic evolution of multiple Fe -rich intermetallics of an Al recycled alloy in 

solidification by synchrotron X -ray and machine learning, Acta Material ia 279 (2024). 

[26] Y. Zhao, W. He, D. Song, W. Zhang, F. Shen, B. Ma, Y. Jia, Z. Sun, Y. Fu, R. Fernández, 

In -situ synchrotron X -ray radiography study of primary Fe -rich phases growth in Al -Fe( Cu) 

alloys, Materials Characterization 195 (2023). 

[27] B. Wang, D. Tan, T.L. Lee, J.C. Khong, F. Wang, D. Eskin, T. Connolley, K. Fezzaa, J. Mi, 

Ultrafast synchrotron X -ray imaging studies of microstructure fragmentation in solidification 

under ultrasound, Acta Materialia 144 (2018) 505 -515. 

[28] S. Huang, S. Luo, L. Qin, D. Shu, B. Sun, A.J.G. Lunt, A.M. Korsunsky, J. Mi, 3D local 

atomic structure evolution in a solidifying Al -0.4Sc dilute alloy melt revealed in operando by 

synchrotron X -ray total scattering and modelling, Scripta Materialia 211 (2022). 

[29] L. Qin, W. Du, S. Cipiccia, A.J. Bodey, C. Rau, J. Mi, Synchrotron X -ray operando study 

and multiphysics modelling of the solidification dynamics of intermetallic phases under 

electromagnetic pulses, Acta Materialia 265 (2023) 119593. 

[30] Z. Zhang, C. Wang, B. Koe, C.M. Schlepütz, S. Irvine, J. Mi, Synchrotron X -ray imaging 

and ultrafast tomography in situ study of the fragmentation and growth dynamics of dendritic 

microstructures in solidification under ultrasound, Acta Materialia 209 (2021). 

[31] Y. Zhao, W. Du, B. Koe, T. Connolley, S. Irvine, P.K. Allan, C.M. Schlepütz, W. Zhang, F. 

Wang, D.G. Eskin, J. Mi, 3D characterisation of the Fe -rich intermetallic phases in recycled Al 

alloys by synchrotron X -ray microtomography and skeletonisation, Scripta Materialia 146 

(2018) 321 -326. 

[32] F. Wang, D. Eskin, J. Mi, C. Wang, B. Koe, A. King, C. Reinhard, T. Connolley, A 

synchrotron X -radiography study of the fragmentation and refinement of primary intermetallic 

particles in an Al -35 Cu alloy induced by ultrasonic melt processing, Acta Ma terialia 141 (2017) 

142 -153. 27 

[33] T. Manuwong, W. Zhang, P.L. Kazinczi, A.J. Bodey, C. Rau, J. Mi, Solidification of Al alloys 

under electromagnetic pulses and characterization of the 3D microstructures using 

synchrotron X -ray tomography, Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A 46( 7) (2015) 2908 -

2915. 

[34] C. Reinhard, M. Drakopoulos, S.I. Ahmed, H. Deyhle, A. James, C.M. Charlesworth, M. 

Burt, J. Sutter, S. Alexander, P. Garland, T. Yates, R. Marshall, B. Kemp, E. Warrick, A. Pueyos, 

B. Bradnick, M. Nagni, A.D. Winter, J. Filik, M. Basham, N. Wadeson, O.N.F. King, N. Aslani, 

A.J. Dent, Beamline K11 DIAD: a new instrument for dual imaging and diffraction at Diamond 

Light Source, J Synchrotron Radiat 28(Pt 6) (2021) 1985 -1995. 

[35] S. Huang, Synchrotron X -ray operando studies of atomic structure evolution of multi -

component Al alloys in liquid state, University of Hull, 2023. 

[36] C. Besnard, A. Marie, S. Sasidharan, H. Deyhle, A.M. James, S.I. Ahmed, C. Reinhard, 

R.A. Harper, R.M. Shelton, G. Landini, A.M. Korsunsky, The DIAD approach to correlative 

synchrotron X -ray imaging and diffraction analysis of human enamel, Chem Biome d Imaging 

2(3) (2024) 222 -232. 

[37] M. Basham, J. Filik, M.T. Wharmby, P.C. Chang, B. El Kassaby, M. Gerring, J. Aishima, K. 

Levik, B.C. Pulford, I. Sikharulidze, Data analysis workbench (DAWN), Synchrotron Radiation 

22(3) (2015) 853 -858. 

[38] A. Hammersley, FIT2D: a multi -purpose data reduction, analysis and visualization 

program, Applied Crystallography 49(2) (2016) 646 -652. 

[39] D. Kazantsev, N. Wadeson, M. Basham, High performance Savu software for fast 3D 

model -based iterative reconstruction of large data at Diamond Light Source, SoftwareX 19 

(2022) 101157. 

[40] H. Putz, K. Brandenburg, Match! phase analysis using powder diffraction, version 3. x, 

crystal impact, GbR, Kreuzherrenstr: Bonn, Germany, 2022. 

[41] C.A. Schneider, W.S. Rasband, K.W. Eliceiri, NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image 

analysis, Nat Methods 9(7) (2012) 671 -5. 

[42] N. Saunders, U. Guo, X. Li, A. Miodownik, J. -P. Schillé, Using JMatPro to model materials 

properties and behavior, Jom 55(12) (2003) 60 -65. 

[43] A.B. Greninger, Orientation in peritectic structures, Nature 137(3468) (1936) 657 -658. 

[44] S. Huang, K. Xiang, J. Mi, Recent advances in synchrotron X -ray studies of the atomic 

structures of metal alloys in liquid state, Journal of Materials Science & Technology 203 (2024) 

180 -200. 

[45] V.I. Kalikmanov, Classical nucleation theory, Nucleation theory, Springer2012, pp. 17 -41. 

[46] S. Zang, S. Paul, C.W. Leung, M.S. Chen, T. Hueckel, G.M. Hocky, S. Sacanna, Direct 

observation and control of non -classical crystallization pathways in binary colloidal systems, 

Nat Commun 16(1) (2025) 3645. 28 

[47] J. Prywer, Kinetic and geometric determination of the growth morphology of bulk crystals: 

Recent developments, Progress in Crystal Growth and Characterization of Materials 50(1 -3) 

(2005) 1 -38. 

[48] G. Wul, Zur Frage der Geschwindigkeit des Wachstums und der Auflosung der Kristall 

achen, Z. Kristallogr 34 (1901) 449 -530. 

[49] A. Bravais, Études cristallographiques, Gauthier -Villars1866. 

[50] G. Friedel, Leçons de cristallographie professées à la Faculté des sciences de Strasbourg, 

Berger -Levrault1926. 

[51] H. Putz, K. Brandenburg, Match! -Phase Analysis using Powder Diffraction, Crystal Impact, 

GbR, Kreuzherrenstr 102 (2016) 53227. 

[52] N. Zhang, W. Lu, Z. Ding, Q. Hu, J. Li, 3D morphology and growth mechanism of primary 

Al3Ni in directionally solidified Al -16 wt% Ni alloy, Journal of Alloys and Compounds 938 

(2023). 

[53] B. Cai, A. Kao, E. Boller, O.V. Magdysyuk, R.C. Atwood, N.T. Vo, K. Pericleous, P.D. Lee, 

Revealing the mechanisms by which magneto -hydrodynamics disrupts solidification 

microstructures, Acta Materialia 196 (2020) 200 -209. 

[54] T. Nelson, B. Cai, N. Warnken, P.D. Lee, E. Boller, O.V. Magdysyuk, N.R. Green, Gravity 

effect on thermal -solutal convection during solidification revealed by four -dimensional 

synchrotron imaging with compositional mapping, Scripta Materialia 180 (202 0) 29 -33. 

[55] Z. Ding, Q. Hu, F. Yang, W. Lu, T. Yang, S. Cao, J. Li, A new sight of the growth 

characteristics of solidified Al3Ni at the liquid –solid interface by synchrotron radiography and 

3D tomography, Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A 51(6) (2020) 2 689 -2696. 

[56] L. Yu, Q. Hu, Z. Ding, F. Yang, W. Lu, N. Zhang, S. Cao, J. Li, Effect of cooling rate on the 

3D morphology of the proeutectic Al3Ni intermetallic compound formed at the Al/Ni interface 

after solidification, Journal of Materials Science & Technology 6 9 (2021) 60 -68. 

[57] J.W. Xian, S.A. Belyakov, M. Ollivier, K. Nogita, H. Yasuda, C.M. Gourlay, Cu6Sn5 crystal 

growth mechanisms during solidification of electronic interconnections, Acta Materialia 126 

(2017) 540 -551. 

[58] Z. Song, O.V. Magdysyuk, T. Sparks, Y. -L. Chiu, B. Cai, Revealing growth mechanisms of 

faceted Al2Cu intermetallic compounds via high -speed Synchrotron X -ray tomography, Acta 

Materialia 231 (2022). 

[59] K. Hyde, A. Norman, P. Prangnell, The effect of cooling rate on the morphology of primary 

Al3Sc intermetallic particles in Al –Sc alloys, Acta Materialia 49(8) (2001) 1327 -1337. 

[60] K. Stan -Głowińska, Ł. Rogal, A. Góral, A. Wierzbicka -Miernik, J. Wojewoda -Budka, N. 

Schell, L. Lityńska -Dobrzyńska, Formation of a quasicrystalline phase in Al –Mn base alloys 

cast at intermediate cooling rates, Journal of Materials Science 52(13) (201 7) 7794 -7807. 29 

[61] H. Kang, T. Wang, X. Li, Y. Su, J. Guo, H. Fu, Faceted –nonfaceted growth transition and 

3-D morphological evolution of primary Al6Mn microcrystals in directionally solidified Al –3 at.% 

Mn alloy, Journal of Materials Research 29(11) (2014) 1256 -1263. 30 

# Supplementary Materials 

1.  Al -Mn binary phase diagram and the peritectic reaction of Al -8wt .%Mn alloy 

Fig S1 shows the Al -Mn equilibrium phase diagram [1]. The peritectic reaction of the Al -

8wt%Mn alloy occurs at 705 ºC, and the three phases are (Mn in atomic percentage): 

Liquid (~2.5 at .% Mn) + μ-Al 4Mn (20 at .% Mn) = Al 6Mn (14.3 at .% Mn) 

Fig. S1. Al -Mn phase diagram (to 30 at .%Mn) [1] . T he dash line marks the Al -8wt .%Mn alloy 

used .

2.  Ex -situ electron microscopy characterization of the peritectic microstructures 

After the in -situ synchrotron X -ray experiments, the microstructures and elemental distribution 

of the solidified Al -8wt% Mn alloy samples were ex -situ characterized using electron 

microscopy. Firstly, a ~3 mm long rod bar was cut from the middle section of the solidified 

sample and then hot -press mounted using conductive Bakelite powders (MetPrep Ltd.) inside 

a hot mounting machine (BUEHLER UK Ltd.). The mounted sample was ground and polished 

according to the Five -Step Contemporary Procedure [2] . The microstructures were 

characterized using a JSM -6610 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM, JEOL Ltd.) equipped 

with an Energy Dispersive X -ray Spectroscopy (EDXS) detector (Oxford Instruments Xmax n

80T) and an Electron Backscattered Diffraction (EBSD) detector (Oxford Instruments 

NordlysNano) available at the Research Complex at Harwell. The EBSD scans were 

conducted at 20 kV with a 1 μm step size. The collected EBSD data were analysed using the 31 

Aztec 2.4 software and HKL CHANNEL5 (v5.0.9.0) software. Fig. S2a (a backscatter electron 

image) shows the microstructures of the solidified sample in a typical 2D area, and Fig. S2b 

shows the zoom -in image for the peritectic phases in side the dotted -line square in Fig. S2a, 

consisting of the primary Al 4Mn phase in the central region and the reacted peritectic phase 

Al 6Mn surrounding the Al 4Mn .

Fig. S2. (a) A typical SEM -BSE image of the solidified Al -8wt. %Mn sample after the in -situ 

experiment. (b) The enlarged image for the area within the dotted -line square in (a), showing 

the typical coupled peritectic structures . (c) and (d) EDXS elemental map of Al and Mn 

respectively . (e) and (f) The EDXS line scan of Al and Mn along the yellow dashed line in (b). 

The insets in (e) and (f) show the enlarged view of the region marked by the white d otted -line 

square in (b). 

Figs. S2c and d show the Al and Mn elemental maps, respectively. Figs. S2e (for Al) and f (for 

Mn) are the line scans along the yellow dotted line in Fig. S2b. showing the count of Al and Mn 

across the coupled peritectic structure within the white d otted -line square shown in Fig. S2b, 

which was further converted into a composition pseudo colour map, enlarged and then 

inserted in Fig. S2e for easy visualisation. The count profiles for the line segment between 

point 1 and point 2 in Figs. S 2e and f indicate t he change of Al and Mn respectively across the 

Al 6Mn -Al 4Mn interface (a measured thickness of ~5 μm as highlighted by the shaded areas in 

Figs. S2e and f, respectively). 32 

Table S1 . The EDXS -measured and equilibrium compositions (shown in the phase diagram) 

of the Al4Mn and Al6Mn phases. 

Phase 

EDXS measured  Equilibrium composition in the 

phase diagram 

Al (at.%)  Mn (at.%)  Al (at.%)  Mn (at.%) 

Al 4Mn  81.42  18.58  80 20 

Al 6Mn  85.88  14.12  85.7  14.3 

Multiple EDXS point quantitative analyses (see Table S1) were made at the homogeneous 

areas for the Al 4Mn and Al 6Mn phases and determined that the Mn is ~18.58 at.% for the Al 4Mn 

and ~14.12 at.% for the Al 6Mn, which agreed very well with the equilibrium compositions 

shown in the phase diagram . However, the EDXS line -scan across the Al 6Mn -Al 4Mn interface 

indicated that there existed a gradual change of Mn concentration (or Al, see the shaded areas 

between point 1 and point 2 in Fig s. S2e and f ) across the interface. Such gradual composition 

change across the interface was also reflected in the grey value change in the 2D projections 

of the tomography data, as described in detail below. 

3.  Gradual change of the pixel grey values across the Al 6Mn -Al 4Mn interface in 2D 

projection of the tomographic data. 

Fig. S3a1 shows the tomography of a typical long hexagonal Al 4Mn primary phase (the 

precursor prior to the peritectic reaction) at 7 06 °C. After completion of the peritectic reaction 

at 6 88 °C, the precursor was wrapped around by a thin layer of Al 6Mn phase (see Fig. S3 b1 ). 

Fig s. S3 a2 and b2 show the 2D slices taken from shaded planes at the positions shown in Fig. 

S3 a1 and b1 . Along the dotted lines in Fig s. S3 a3 and b 3, the pixel grey values are plotted 

and shown in Fig. S3c. Clearly, for the Al 4Mn (whether in the Al 4Mn precursor or in the Al 4Mn 

after the peritectic reaction), the averaged grey values are relatively constant at ~ 200 a.u. 

However, across over the Al 6Mn -Al 4Mn interface along the black line in Fig. S 3b3 (both ends 

of the black line are highlighted with black dots) , there are clear changes of the grey value 

with the profile’s slope in the blue -shaded region match ing the profile’s slope of the EDXS line -

scan ( see the profiles in Fig s. S 2e and f). 33 

Fig. S3 . (a1) tomography of the peritectic precursor Al 4Mn , and (b1) the peritectic product 

Al 6Mn. (a2 and a3) 2D slices and the corresponding pseudo -colour attenuation maps of the 

Al 4Mn precursor at the positions indicated by the shaded squares in (a1). (b2 and b3) 2D slices 

and the corresponding pseudo -colour attenuation maps of the peritectic Al 6Mn at the positions 

indicated by the shaded squares in (b1). (c) Grey -value profiles taken along the dotted lines 

in ( a3 ) and (b3). 34 

4.  Establishing the correlation between the Mn concentration and the pixel grey values 

Fig. S4a superimposes the EDXS profile for the Mn and the grey -value profile across the 

Al 6Mn -Al 4Mn interface (the interface was enlarged for a clearer view). 

Fig. S4. (a) Comparison of the EDXS Mn -count profile with the grey -value profile extracted 

from the tomographic slice across the Al 6Mn -Al 4Mn interface (the line segment between point 

3 and point 4). The left inset is the one in Fig. S2e. The right inset is the white dotted square 

in Fig. S3b 3). (b) The converted Mn concentration profile ( the black profile after a data smooth 

operation ) with the grey -value profile (red) across the interface (the line segment between 

point 3 and point 4 ).

Clearly, across the interface (see the inset from point 3 to point 4) , there exists a Mn diffusion 

layer of ~5 μm thick with nearly the same slope for the EDXS line scan count and the grey 

value profile from the tomography slice. Such a good agreement confirmed that the change of 

the grey value across the interface actually reflects the change of Mn concentration. Hence, 

we converted (via a normalisation operation) the EDXS Mn count to the atomic percentage of 

the Mn in the Al 4Mn and Al 6Mn (see Fig. S4b). T he Mn (18.58 at.%) in the Al 4Mn corresponds 

to a grey value of 200 a.u (2D slice) , whereas 14.12 at.% Mn in the Al 6Mn phase corresponds 

to a grey value of 167 a.u. Then a linear relationship between the Mn concentration C Mn (at.%) 

and grey value G was established across the Al 6Mn -Al 4Mn as below: 

𝐶 𝑀𝑛 = 0.133 𝐺 − 8.296  (S1) 35 

Since all in -situ tomograms in this work were acquired from the same Al -8wt .% Mn alloy under 

identical imaging conditions and the precursor Al 4Mn phases have near -constant grey value 

during solidification, Eq. S1 was applied to all datasets to obtain the Mn concentration profiles 

across the Al 4Mn phase and the surrounding liquid. 36 

Fig. S5 . (a1 and b 1) 3D morphological evolution of a typical Al 4Mn phase during solidification. 

(a2 and b2) The typical 2D slices and (a3 and b3) the corresponding pseudo -colour 

attenuation map s of Al 4Mn phase at the cross -sections indicated by the shaded squares in (a1 

and b1 ), respectively. ( c) Calibrated Mn -concentration profiles along the dashed lines in ( a3 

and b3 ), calculated using Eq. S1. 

Fig s. S5a1 and b 1 show the 3D morphological evolution of a typical Al 4Mn primary phase 

during solidification from 7 24 ºC to 7 06 ºC (prior to the peritectic reaction , see Fig. S1) . The 

equilibrium phase diagram ( Fig. S1 ) indicates that , over this temperature range , the Mn in the 

liquid decreased from ~4 at.% to 3 at .% , while that in the Al 4Mn phase decreased from 20 at.% 

to 19 at.% . Using Eq. S1, the calculated Mn concentration in the liquid (Fig. S5c) decreases 

from ~ 6 at.% to 4 at.%, whereas the Mn content in the Al 4Mn phase is in the range of 20 at.% 

to 16 at.% . The broadly consistent trend and magnitude between the calculated values and 

the phase -diagram predictions indicate that the approach we used is sensible and consistent. 

5.  EBSD analyses of the orientation relationship of the peritectic structure 

To determine the orientation relationship of the Al 4Mn and Al 6Mn in the peritectic structure, the 

coordinate system of the samples was adjusted in the virtual chamber to allow the basal plane 

(i.e., {0001}) of the Al 4Mn phase to be horizontally perpendicular to the screen. It should be 

noted that this does not change the relative orientation relationship between the Al 4Mn and 

Al 6Mn phases. By comparison, the highly overlapping poles undoubtedly demonstrate the 

existence of a specific crystallographic orientation relationship between the peritectic 

precursor (Al 4Mn of HCP structure) and its products (Al 6Mn of orthorhombic struc ture), i.e., 

{10 -10} HCP // {110} O, [0001] HCP // [001] O.

Fig. S 6. (a) The pole figures and (b) the inverse pole figures of the Al 4Mn and Al 6Mn phases. 37 

Reference s

[1] M. Asgar -Khan, M. Medraj, Thermodynamic Description of the Mg -Mn, Al -Mn and Mg -Al -

Mn Systems Using the Modified Quasichemical Model for the Liquid Phases, Materials 

Transactions 50(5) (2009) 1113 -1122. 

[2] B.J.J. Koe, In -situ synchrotron X -ray study of phase separation in metal solidification under 

alternating magnetic fields, University of Hull, 2020.