Title: A2RAG: Adaptive Agentic Graph Retrieval for Cost-Aware and Reliable Reasoning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2601.21162v1

Published Time: Fri, 30 Jan 2026 01:19:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# A2RAG: Adaptive Agentic Graph Retrieval for Cost-Aware and Reliable Reasoning 

Jiate Liu 1, Zebin Chen 1, Shaobo Qiao 2, Mingchen Ju 2, Danting Zhang, Bocheng Han 1, Shuyue Yu 3,4 ,Xin Shu 1,4 , Jingling Wu 3,4 , Dong Wen 1, Xin Cao 1, Guanfeng Liu 5 and Zhengyi Yang 1,* 

> 1

University of New South Wales, 2Euler AI, 3Sigma Trading Management, 4Eigenflow AI, 5Macquarie University, 

> 1

{jiate.liu, zebin.chen1, bocheng.han, xin.shu7, dong.wen, xin.cao, zhengyi.yang }@unsw.edu.au; 

> 2

{shaobo.qiao, mingchen.ju }@eulerai.au; 3{carol.yu, anthony.wu }@sigmatm.com.au;  

> 5

guanfeng.liu@mq.edu.au; dantingxing1994@outlook.com 

Abstract —Graph Retrieval-Augmented Generation (Graph-RAG) enhances multihop question answering by organizing corpora into knowledge graphs and routing evidence through relational structure. However, practical deployments face two persistent bottlenecks: (i) mixed-difficulty workloads where one-size-fits-all retrieval either wastes cost on easy queries or fails on hard multihop cases, and (ii) extraction loss, where graph abstraction omits fine-grained qualifiers that remain only in source text. We present A2RAG, an adaptive-and-agentic 

GraphRAG framework for cost-aware and reliable reasoning. A2RAG couples an adaptive controller that verifies evidence sufficiency and triggers targeted refinement only when necessary, with an agentic retriever that progressively escalates retrieval effort and maps graph signals back to provenance text to remain robust under extraction loss and incomplete graphs. Experiments on HotpotQA and 2WikiMultiHopQA demonstrate that A2RAG achieves +9.9/+11.8 absolute gains in Recall@2, while cutting token consumption and end-to-end latency by about 50% relative to iterative multihop baselines. 

Index Terms —Retrieval Augmented Generation, RAG, GraphRAG, LLM Agents, Multi-hop Reasoning, Knowledge Graphs. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demon-strated transformative capabilities across diverse domains [1], including natural language understanding [1], [2], code gener-ation [3], multi-modal retrieval [4]–[6], and complex reason-ing [7]–[9]. However, in critical sectors such as finance, healthcare, and law, their practical utility remains fundamentally limited by a lack of intrinsic grounding. This limitation frequently leads to hallucinations—the generation of statements that are linguis-tically plausible yet unsupported by reliable evidence [10]. For example, in financial risk monitoring or legal compliance, where every decision must be traceable and auditable, such hallucinations pose unacceptable operational risks. To mitigate these issues, Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has emerged as a standard solution by augmenting LLMs with an external corpus and conditioning generation on retrieved evidence [11], [12]. Despite its success, conventional RAG systems typically rely on dense retrieval and similarity-based search to fetch isolated text chunks [13], [14]. This paradigm often overlooks latent structural relations among 

> *Zhengyi Yang is the corresponding author.

entities and struggles to synthesize information distributed across multiple documents, leading to context fragmentation ,where the LLM is provided with noisy and weakly connected evidence snippets. Graph Retrieval-Augmented Generation (GraphRAG) ad-dresses this limitation by explicitly modeling entities and their relations as a knowledge graph, thereby enabling retrieval and reasoning over structured dependencies [15], [16]. By converting unstructured text into a structured graph represen-tation, GraphRAG can navigate semantic dependencies and compose multi-hop evidence through graph traversal, bridging informational gaps that are difficult to capture with flat, vector-based retrieval. Recent work further explores graph-guided reasoning paradigms that integrate structured reasoning paths into LLM inference [17], [18]. 

Motivation and Challenges. Despite its promise, deploying GraphRAG in practical and production-scale environments exposes two fundamental bottlenecks that existing systems have yet to adequately address. 

Challenge 1: One-size-fits-all retrieval under mixed-difficulty workloads. Existing GraphRAG systems typically adopt a fixed retrieval strategy: some [15], [16] prioritize graph-wide 

global operations (e.g., community-summary-based global search in Microsoft GraphRAG), while others [19] are de-signed to remain within a cheap local neighborhood. However, our empirical analysis on production-level queries—collected from real-world user interactions on a foreign exchange (FX) trading platform ( LP Margin ) [20], together with standard multi-hop benchmarks [21], [22]—reveals a pronounced work-load skew: approximately 60% of queries can be answered using simple, low-cost retrieval, whereas the remaining 40% require genuinely complex, multi-hop evidence composition. This mismatch leads to two clear failure modes. When a system always applies complex retrieval, it incurs unnecessary latency and token overhead on the majority of easy queries, and may even introduce additional noise by over-expanding the context. Conversely, when a system always relies on simple retrieval, it fails precisely on the hard-tail cases where evidence is distributed and must be composed across multiple hops. The core difficulty is that this “easy vs. hard” distinction is not reliably detectable a priori: surface-level signals such 

> arXiv:2601.21162v1 [cs.IR] 29 Jan 2026

as keyword overlap or query length are often insufficient to predict whether multi-hop reasoning will be required. At a deeper level, this reflects a fundamental decision-making gap : current GraphRAG systems lack an adaptive mechanism that can assess evidence sufficiency during re-trieval and decide whether to terminate early or escalate retrieval effort under a budget. Without such a progressive, evidence-aware policy, systems are forced into a one-size-fits-all routine that results in either systematic waste or systematic failure. While some prior work has explored adaptive retrieval via question complexity estimation or self-reflection, these approaches are largely text-centric and do not provide a graph-specific design that progressively escalates retrieval while preserving provenance and controllability [23]–[25]. 

Challenge 2: Vulnerability to extraction loss and knowledge in-completeness. In practice, a knowledge graph constructed from text typically captures the coarse “who-is-related-to-what” structure, but it often misses the fine-grained qualifiers that determine correctness in real decision-making. We repeatedly observe this phenomenon in production-level corpora: many queries depend on conditions, numerical thresholds, temporal qualifiers, and exceptions, yet these details are frequently not represented explicitly once the corpus is converted into a graph for retrieval [26]. As a result, a system that relies solely on the graph may return answers that appear structurally plausible but are imprecise or even incorrect when the missing qualifiers are critical. A key reason is that typical extraction pipelines are opti-mized to produce clean subject–relation–object triples, which incentivizes dropping qualifiers that do not fit naturally into a single edge label. We refer to this systematic omission as extraction loss : the resulting graph becomes a simplified projection of the corpus, while crucial details remain only in the original text. Moreover, real-world data is inherently noisy: entity mentions may overlap, relations are often implicit, and extraction errors can fragment the graph, leading to incomplete and uneven coverage. For example, consider a financial compliance query re-garding trade limits. A source document might state: “Bank A is permitted to execute high-leverage trades in Region X, provided the daily volatility remains below 2.0%.” An extraction pipeline may retain only the triple (Bank A, permitted_in, Region X) , discarding the critical con-ditional constraint on volatility. As another example from an FX risk corpus, the same liquidity provider may appear as “CFH”, “CFH Clearing”, or “[GUI] CFH” across logs and reports. If the extractor fails to normalize these aliases, the graph will contain multiple disconnected nodes for the same real-world entity, causing relevant facts to be split across components and preventing retrieval from following the intended evidence chain. Simply “fixing the graph” by making extraction increas-ingly sophisticated is often impractical: it requires case-specific prompts and frequent re-extraction, which becomes prohibitively expensive to maintain in dynamic environments. Importantly, our observation is that even when fine-grained details are missing, the graph’s connectivity structure is often largely correct. This suggests that the appropriate role of the graph is to serve as a navigational map to locate relevant regions of the corpus, while the system must ultimately recover precise and auditable evidence from the original source text. The core challenge, therefore, is to design retrieval mecha-nisms that are robust to imperfect and detail-poor graphs, using structure for routing but relying on provenance text for final, high-precision answering [26]. 

Our Solution and Contributions. To address these chal-lenges, we present A2RAG (Adaptive Agentic Graph 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation), a unified framework that decouples answer-level reliability control from retrieval-level progressive evidence acquisition . We formulate retrieval as a dynamic, cost-aware process governed by two complementary layers: 

Adaptive Control Loop. A reliability-oriented closed-loop mechanism that verifies the final answer against retrieved provenance via Triple-Check (relevance, grounding, and ad-equacy). Rather than micromanaging individual retrieval op-erators, the controller diagnoses failure modes and triggers 

failure-aware query rewriting with bounded retries, ensuring that subsequent retrieval attempts are better targeted instead of repeatedly executing the same ineffective routine. This extends the spirit of adaptive retrieval to graph-augmented settings [23], [24]. 

Agentic Retriever. A stateful agent that executes a progressive, local-first retrieval policy with stage-wise evidence sufficiency checks . It early-stops on easy queries after inexpensive local expansion, escalates to bounded bridge discovery when multi-hop connectors are required, and employs a global Personal-ized PageRank (PPR)-guided fallback as a last resort [27], [28]. Crucially, it maps high-relevance graph regions back to provenance text chunks to recover precise conditions, nu-merical constraints, and qualifiers that may be missing from imperfect graphs, using the graph primarily as a navigational scaffold rather than as a complete semantic store [26]. In summary, our contributions are threefold:  

> •

Evidence-Sufficiency Adaptive Control Loop. We intro-duce a closed-loop controller that verifies evidence at the answer level and triggers refinement or escalation only when evidence sufficiency is not met, mitigating the cost– capability mismatch of static retrieval.  

> •

Agentic Graph Retrieval with Provenance Recovery. We propose a progressive retriever with an explicit escalation policy and a provenance map-back mechanism, enhancing robustness to extraction loss compared to graph-only base-lines.  

> •

Extensive Empirical Evaluation. We evaluate A2RAG on two public datasets and one production dataset. On the public benchmarks HotpotQA and 2WikiMultiHopQA [21], [22], A2RAG achieves absolute gains of 9.9% and 11.8% in Recall@2, respectively, while reducing token usage and la-tency by approximately 50% compared to iterative baselines such as IRCoT [29]. II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 

A. Problem Definition 

Setting We study knowledge-intensive question answering where a system must answer a natural-language query using 

verifiable evidence, and the required facts may be distributed across multiple sources (multi-hop). 

Notation Let the input be a query q and a text corpus D =

{d1, . . . , d N } consisting of provenance passages/chunks. We assume an offline-constructed knowledge graph G = ( V, EG )

built from D via an information extraction pipeline, where V

denotes entity nodes and EG denotes relation edges. We further assume an offline map-back function π : V → 2D that returns the set of provenance chunks in D associated with a node (e.g., mentioning or defining the entity). 

Goal The system outputs an answer a together with an evidence set E ⊆ D that grounds a, or returns an abstention signal when sufficient evidence cannot be obtained under a bounded retrieval budget. 

Motivation Automatically constructed graphs summarize text into entities and relations and may omit fine-grained details (e.g., numbers, temporal qualifiers, constraints), an effect we refer to as extraction loss [15], [26]. In deployment, retrieval must therefore balance (i) efficiency versus coverage for hard multi-hop queries, (ii) maintenance overhead under corpus updates, and (iii) robustness via faithful provenance recovery from source text when graph abstractions are insufficient. 

B. Related Methods 

Prior work on retrieval for knowledge-intensive multi-hop QA spans graph-augmented pipelines, iterative multi-hop text retrieval, and adaptive/agentic control mechanisms [16]. 

Local graph retrieval. Lightweight GraphRAG variants em-phasize efficiency by anchoring retrieval on query-aligned entities and restricting expansion to local neighborhoods, often combined with lexical matching. LightRAG is a representative example that targets low-latency, simple deployment while still leveraging graph structure for routing [16], [19]. A common limitation of local-first access is that it can still struggle with harder multi-hop queries that require discovering non-local connectors, motivating mechanisms that escalate beyond immediate neighborhoods when local evidence is insufficient [16], [19]. 

Global summarization and indexing. At the other extreme, Microsoft GraphRAG constructs global structure by detect-ing graph communities (e.g., Leiden [30]) and generating hierarchical natural-language summaries to support query-focused summarization and corpus-level sense-making [15], [16]. While this paradigm can improve coverage for broad queries, it typically requires substantial offline computation, and rebuilding or refreshing graph-derived indices/summaries as the corpus evolves can incur non-trivial maintenance over-head [15], [16]. 

Iterative text retrieval for multi-hop reasoning. A line of work improves multi-hop coverage by interleaving retrieval with step-by-step reasoning in flat text space. IRCoT ex-emplifies this strategy by alternating intermediate reasoning with follow-up retrieval to gather distributed evidence across passages [29]. Such text-only iterative retrieval often requires multiple rounds of querying and context accumulation, which may increase runtime cost and amplify noisy evidence com-pared to structure-guided routing [12], [29]. 

Adaptive and agentic retrieval control. Adaptive retrieval frameworks introduce dynamic control to allocate retrieval effort based on query difficulty, with actions such as deciding when to retrieve, reflect/critique retrieved content or intermedi-ate answers, and when to stop or skip retrieval [23]–[25]. Most of these designs are developed primarily for flat text retrieval and do not explicitly model graph-native escalation operators (e.g., local neighborhood expansion versus bridge discovery versus global diffusion), which are central to GraphRAG-style pipelines [16], [23]. 

Robustness to structural abstraction. Graph-based retrieval relies on offline information extraction, and the resulting structural abstraction can omit fine-grained details that re-main in the original text (e.g., numbers, temporal qualifiers, exceptions). This motivates provenance recovery mechanisms that map structure-guided signals back to source passages for faithful grounding [16], [26]. 

Takeaway Overall, global GraphRAG improves coverage but increases build and refresh cost [15], local graph retrieval is efficient but can miss non-local connectors [19], iterative text retrieval improves multi-hop coverage at the expense of multiple rounds of retrieval [29], and adaptive agents largely operate over flat text actions rather than graph-native escalation [23]–[25]. These gaps motivate a unified framework that supports cost-aware escalation over graph-native operations while recovering faithful provenance from source text under structural abstraction [16], [26]. III. A2RAG F RAMEWORK 

A. Overview 

We present A2RAG, a unified framework that decouples 

adaptive control from agentic retrieval to enable cost-aware and reliable evidence acquisition for knowledge-intensive multi-hop QA. 

Two-Layer Architecture. A2RAG consists of two tightly coupled components (Figure 1). 

(1) Adaptive Control Loop. The controller governs the retrieval lifecycle at a global level. It decides whether to retrieve via lightweight gating, generates a candidate answer, and performs answer-level verification for relevance, ground-ing, and query resolution. When verification fails, it triggers failure-aware query rewriting and bounded retries under a given budget. Human-in-the-loop validation is supported as an optional extension for safe knowledge base evolution. 

(2) Agentic Retriever. Once retrieval is invoked, the re-triever acts as a stateful agent that performs progressive evidence discovery with a local-first, escalation-on-demand policy. It performs stage-wise evidence sufficiency checks after each retrieval stage to decide whether to escalate for additional evidence (sufficiency for escalation decisions rather than certification of answer correctness). When the graph is Fig. 1. A2RAG Framework Overview  

> Fig. 2. Adaptive Control Loop

sparse or suffers from extraction loss, the retriever recovers fine-grained provenance by mapping high-scoring graph nodes or regions back to source text chunks in D.

Component interaction. The controller invokes the retriever with the current query state (including any rewritten query), and the retriever returns provenance evidence for answering. The controller then generates an answer and verifies it; upon failure, it rewrites the query and re-invokes retrieval within a bounded budget. This separation of concerns enables reliable and cost-aware answering without committing to a fixed retrieval pipeline. We now describe each component in detail, beginning with the adaptive control loop (Section III-B) and followed by the agentic retriever (Section III-C). 

B. Adaptive Control Loop 

The adaptive control loop orchestrates retrieval and answer-ing under practical constraints. It (i) filters out out-of-scope queries before retrieval, (ii) verifies answer correctness against provenance evidence, and (iii) revises the query with bounded retries when evidence is misaligned or insufficient. Figure 2 summarizes the control flow. 

1) Entry: Summarized-KB Gating: In real deployments, many queries are out-of-scope or only weakly related to the indexed corpus. Running retrieval and large-model inference for such queries wastes budget and may introduce spurious evidence. We therefore apply a lightweight gate that estimates corpus coverage before invoking retrieval. 

Offline summaries. For each document dj ∈ D , we pre-compute a short summary sj during indexing and collect all summaries into S = {sj }Nj=1 , where N := |D| .

Gate decision. Given a query q, we compute a similarity score 

γj (q) ∈ [0 , 1] between q and each summary sj (e.g., cosine similarity between dense embeddings, optionally clipped to 

[0 , 1] ). We define 

Gate( q) := ⊮



max  

> 1≤j≤N

γj (q) ≥ τg



∈ { 0, 1}, (1) where τg ∈ [0 , 1] is a threshold and ⊮{·} is the indicator function. If Gate( q) = 0 , the system returns A BSTAIN (or falls back to a lightweight non-retrieval mode); otherwise, the controller invokes the agentic retriever. 

2) Exit: Verified Answering via Triple-Check: Retrieval alone does not guarantee faithful answers. Retrieved passages may be off-topic, the model may generate unsupported claims, or the answer may fail to resolve the query. We therefore enforce a verification layer that checks three complementary properties. Let E ⊆ D denote the retrieved provenance evidence (i.e., text chunks from the corpus), and let a ∈ Text be a candidate answer generated by a language model conditioned on (q, E).We define three binary validators 

Vrel (q, E) ∈ { 0, 1}, evidence relevance , (2) 

Vgrd (a, E) ∈ { 0, 1}, answer grounded in evidence , (3) 

Vans (q, a ) ∈ { 0, 1}, query resolution / adequacy . (4) The overall predicate is their conjunction 

TripleCheck( q, a, E) := Vrel (q, E) ∧ Vgrd (a, E) ∧ Vans (q, a ),

(5) where ∧ denotes logical AND. Each validator can be instan-tiated using an NLI model or a prompted LLM-based binary classifier. The controller accepts a iff TripleCheck( q, a, E) = 1; otherwise it proceeds to iterative refinement. 

3) Iteration: Failure-Aware Rewrite and Bounded Retry: 

When verification fails, simply re-running retrieval with the same query often repeats the same mistakes (e.g., retrieving the same neighborhood or the same off-topic passages). We instead rewrite the query based on the failure mode and retry within a bounded budget. 

Failure type and rewrite. At controller iteration i, let 

(q(i), a (i), E(i)) denote the current query, candidate answer, and evidence, with q(0) := q. We define a failure type 

type (i) ∈ { rel , grd , ans } as the first violated condition among 

Vrel (q(i), E(i)), Vgrd (a(i), E(i)), and Vans (q(i), a (i)). We then rewrite the query with a type-conditioned function 

q(i+1) := Rewrite 



q(i), a (i), E(i), type (i)

, (6) where Rewrite( ·) is implemented via prompting the language model. In practice, the rewrite sharpens entity/relation expres-sions when evidence is off-topic, requests stricter evidence-grounded answering when unsupported claims are detected, and adds missing constraints implied by the question when the answer is incomplete. Bounded retry. The controller repeats retrieval and verifica-tion for at most Imax ∈ N iterations (typically small, e.g., 2–3). If TripleCheck( q(i), a (i), E(i)) = 1 at any iteration, the con-troller returns (a(i), E(i)). Otherwise, it returns F AIL /A BSTAIN 

after exhausting the budget. 

4) Optional: Human-in-the-Loop Knowledge Base Update: 

For domains where correctness and governance are critical, we optionally support a human-in-the-loop (HITL) pathway to curate knowledge over time. After a query is successfully verified, the system proposes candidate triples from the ver-ified provenance E with source pointers. A human reviewer approves or rejects each proposal before insertion into the knowledge graph. This module is orthogonal to the core control loop and is not required for standard operation. 

C. Agentic Retriever 

The agentic retriever performs evidence acquisition once retrieval is invoked by the adaptive control loop. Its design goal is to collect sufficient evidence at minimal cost while remaining robust to extraction loss in the offline knowledge graph. To this end, the retriever operates as a stateful agent that follows a local-first, escalation-on-demand policy: it be-gins with inexpensive local graph operations and escalates to more global actions only when the accumulated evidence is judged insufficient for answering. Importantly, the retriever performs stage-wise evidence sufficiency checks to guide escalation, rather than certifying answer correctness.Unlike general-purpose tool-using agents that freely select actions, the retriever in A2RAG is an agent with an explicitly constrained action space and a monotonic escalation policy. This design trades expressive freedom for predictability, efficiency, and verifiable termination, which are critical in retrieval-centric systems.Figure 3 provides an overview of the retriever state, the local-first escalation hierarchy, and the provenance map-back fallback. 

Retriever state. At each step, the retriever maintains a state 

⟨q, SV , SR, E⟩ , where q is the current query (possibly rewritten by the controller), SV denotes aligned entity seeds, SR denotes aligned relation seeds (optional), and E is the accumulated evidence. Evidence is graph-structured (triples) in Stages 1–2 and provenance text chunks E ⊆ D in Stage 3. The state is carried across stages, and evidence is accumulated. 

Seed extraction and alignment. Given a query q, we ex-tract entity mentions bE(q) = {ˆe1, . . . , ˆem} using a standard NER/phrase extractor and align them to KG nodes via a hybrid lexical–semantic matcher (e.g., edit similarity combined with embedding cosine), retaining only high-confidence matches as 

SV ⊆ V . Optionally, we extract relation phrases bR(q) = 

{ˆr1, . . . , ˆrn} and align them to KG relation types to obtain 

SR ⊆ R , which is used as a lightweight filter to suppress edges inconsistent with the query’s relational intent. 

1) Stage 1: Local Evidence Collection: Many practical queries can be answered from facts within a small neigh-borhood of salient entities. Stage 1 therefore performs local expansion around entity seeds, which is computationally cheap and often sufficient.  

> Fig. 3. Agentic retriever

Local neighborhood expansion. Given a knowledge graph 

G = ( V, EG ), the 1-hop neighbors of a seed v ∈ S V are defined as 

N1(v) := {u ∈ V | (v, r, u ) ∈ E G or (u, r, v ) ∈ E G , ∃r ∈ R} .

(7) If relation seeds SR are available, we retain only edges whose relation types are consistent with SR; otherwise, all incident edges are kept. The union of 1-hop neighborhoods over v ∈SV forms a small induced subgraph, which is serialized as graph-structured evidence. 

Rationale. Local-first retrieval targets the common case where relevant evidence is concentrated near a few aligned entities. Early termination at this stage avoids unnecessary global traversal and reduces exposure to noisy or spurious paths. 

2) Stage 2: Bridge Discovery: When Stage 1 fails to connect multiple query entities, the missing evidence often lies on short multi-hop connectors. Stage 2 searches for compact 

bridge nodes that jointly link multiple entity seeds, yielding a small but high-signal subgraph. 

Bridge definition. To stabilize connectivity, we operate on an augmented graph G′ that includes inverse edges. Let NK (v)

denote the set of nodes within K hops of v in G′, where K ≥ 2

is a small hop budget. Bridge candidates are defined as 

BK := 

n

u ∈ V {v ∈ S V : u ∈ N K (v)} ≥ 2

o

. (8) This relaxed multi-seed constraint avoids brittle full intersec-tions while enforcing meaningful cross-entity connectivity. 

Bridge evidence construction. For each bridge node b ∈ B K ,we extract a small number of short paths (e.g., shortest paths) connecting b to nearby seeds. The union of their triples constitutes Stage 2 graph evidence. Both hop length and the number of paths per pair are capped to control evidence size. If the resulting evidence remains insufficient, the retriever escalates to Stage 3. 

3) Stage 3: Global Fallback with Degree-Normalized PPR and Provenance Map-back: Stages 1–2 may fail when the graph is sparse or suffers from extraction loss, where fine-grained details (e.g., numerical values, temporal qualifiers, ex-ceptions) are absent from extracted triples. Stage 3 performs a global, structure-guided retrieval using Personalized PageRank (PPR), followed by a map-back to provenance text to recover such details. 

PPR formulation. Let G′ = ( V, E′) be the augmented graph and n := |V| . Define the adjacency matrix A ∈ { 0, 1}n×n

with Auv = 1 iff (u, ·, v ) ∈ E ′, and the transition matrix 

Puv := Auv 

deg( u) , (9) where deg( u) = P 

> v

Auv . We construct a degree-normalized personalization distribution for entity seeds SV :

p0(u) := 

( deg( u)−1 

> Z

, u ∈ S V ,

0, otherwise , Z := X

> u∈S V

deg( u)−1.

(10) With teleport probability α ∈ (0 , 1) , the PPR score vector r

is defined by the fixed point 

r = αp0 + (1 − α)P ⊤r. (11) 

Provenance map-back. We select the top-L nodes by PPR score and map them back to provenance text chunks using an offline mapping π : V → 2D . The final text evidence is 

E := [

> u∈V top -L

π(u) ⊆ D . (12) This map-back step is essential for robustness to extraction loss: it leverages global graph structure for routing while grounding the final answer in the original source text. 

4) Escalation Policy and Termination: The retriever follows a monotonic escalation hierarchy (Local → Bridge → Global). Each stage is invoked at most once per query, and evidence sufficiency is evaluated after each stage to decide whether escalation is necessary. Since the number of stages is finite and each stage is bounded by explicit budgets, the retrieval process always terminates. 

D. End-to-End Summary 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the end-to-end execution of A2RAG under a clear separation of responsibilities between 

global control and agentic retrieval . The controller applies summarized-KB gating to filter out out-of-scope queries, veri-fies candidate answers against provenance evidence via Triple-Check, and performs bounded, failure-aware query rewriting when necessary. Once invoked, the agentic retriever operates as a stateful agent with a constrained action space and a monotonic, local-first escalation policy to collect sufficient evidence at minimal cost. The procedure always terminates within a bounded budget, returning a verified and grounded 

Algorithm 1 A2RAG End-to-End Procedure 

Require: Query q, corpus D, summaries S = {sj }Nj=1 , KG 

G = ( V, EG ), threshold τg , max retries Imax 

Ensure: Verified answer a with evidence E ⊆ D , or A B-

> STAIN

/F AIL 1: // Entry: summarized-KB gating  

> 2:

q(0) ← q 

> 3:

if Gate( q(0) ) = 0 then  

> 4:

return ABSTAIN ▷ out-of-scope or insufficient corpus coverage  

> 5:

end if  

> 6:

for i ← 0 to Imax do  

> 7:

// Evidence acquisition (agentic retriever)  

> 8:

E(i) ← AGENTIC RETRIEVE (q(i), G, D) ▷ local-first, escalation-on-demand retrieval  

> 9:

// Candidate answering  

> 10:

a(i) ← GENERATE ANSWER (q(i), E(i)) 

> 11:

// Exit: answer-level verification  

> 12:

if TripleCheck( q(i), a (i), E(i)) = 1 then  

> 13:

a ← a(i); E ← E (i) 

> 14:

OPTIONAL HITLU PDATE (E, G) 

> 15:

return a ▷ verified and grounded  

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

// Iteration: failure-aware rewriting  

> 18:

type (i) ← FAILURE TYPE (q(i), a (i), E(i)) 

> 19:

q(i+1) ← Rewrite  q(i), a (i), E(i), type (i) 

> 20:

end for  

> 21:

return FAIL ▷ retry budget exhausted answer when possible, or abstaining when reliable evidence cannot be obtained. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Experimental Setup 1) Tasks and Datasets: We evaluate A2RAG on multi-hop, knowledge-intensive question answering (QA), where answer-ing requires integrating evidence distributed across multiple documents. Experiments are conducted on HotpotQA [21] and 

2WikiMultiHopQA [22]. 

Dataset setting. Due to resource constraints, we run all experiments on subsets of the above benchmarks by sampling a fixed number of instances from each dataset. This setting is sufficient for controlled comparison, but scaling to the full datasets is left for future work. 

2) Baselines and Evaluation Protocol: Our evaluation fol-lows two protocols. 

(i) General QA performance. We compare A2RAG against three representative modes: NoRAG (base LLM without retrieval), TextRAG (dense passage retrieval over the cor-pus), and LightRAG [19] (local graph-based retrieval with neighborhood-level context). We report end-task QA per-formance ( EM /F1 ) and retrieval quality ( Recall@ K, K ∈{2, 5}). 

(ii) Multi-hop efficiency. To assess the cost of multi-step retrieval, we compare A2RAG with IRCoT [29], an iterative retrieval baseline designed for multi-hop evidence accumulation. We report latency and cost metrics (token usage and/or number of LLM calls) and retrieval/QA quality. 

3) Models: Unless otherwise specified, the backbone LLM is gpt-4o-mini with deterministic decoding (temperature = 0 ). For dense retrieval components, we use text-embedding-3-small as the retrieval encoder. All baselines are configured to use the same backbone models to ensure a fair comparison. 

4) A2RAG-Specific Measurements: To characterize the be-havior of progressive retrieval, we additionally report: (i) the fraction of queries resolved by local 1-hop retrieval , by 

K-hop bridge discovery , and by the PPR-based global fallback , (ii) an ablation that removes relation seeding (node-only seeds) to quantify the benefit of relation-aware retrieval, (iii) a focused comparison of retrieved provenance chunks for 

PPR map-back versus TextRAG on instances where PPR is triggered, and (iv) a robustness test that simulates extraction loss by deleting nodes/edges from the KG and evaluating performance degradation. 

Evaluation map. We evaluate by addressing three core ques-tions: (Q1) Does A2RAG improve evidence retrieval under small-K budgets? (Table I); (Q2) Does progressive escalation reduce multi-hop cost compared to an iterative retrieve–reason baseline? (Tables II and III, Fig. 4); (Q3) Is A2RAG robust to extraction loss, and does PPR map-back recover higher-quality provenance evidence? (Figs. 5 and 6, Sec. IV-F). 

B. Main Results on Multi-hop QA Benchmarks 

Table I summarizes the results on HotpotQA [21] and 2WikiMultiHopQA [22]. Overall, A2RAG achieves the strongest evidence retrieval performance on both bench-marks. On HotpotQA, A2RAG reaches Recall@2/Recall@5 of 62.4/73.6, exceeding the strongest LightRAG mode (mix) [19] (56.8/67.5). On 2WikiMultiHopQA, A2RAG again yields the best recall (58.9/69.2), outperforming LightRAG (mix) (52.7/63.8). These gains validate the central design choice of A2RAG: a progressive retrieval policy that first attempts compact mid-range bridge discovery and only activates PPR diffusion as a last-resort fallback, while always grounding retrieval in provenance chunks. In terms of answer accuracy, A2RAG is competitive but does not always attain the best EM/F1. On HotpotQA, Ligh-tRAG (mix) achieves the highest EM/F1 (33.9/46.5), while A2RAG obtains 32.2/43.7. On 2WikiMultiHopQA, LightRAG (mix) achieves the best EM (31.5) and A2RAG achieves comparable F1 (42.9 vs. 41.5), but slightly lower EM (30.0 vs. 31.5). This pattern is consistent with the objective and control mechanism of A2RAG: we explicitly optimize the retriever for high-confidence evidence inclusion under small-K budgets (reflected by the largest Recall@K gains), and the bounded verification loop prioritizes strict groundedness and adequacy, which can trade off some generation flexibility and surface-form matching measured by EM/F1. We further contextualize this trade-off via system-level efficiency (Sec. IV-C) and mechanistic analysis of progressive escalation (Sec. IV-D).                                                              

> TABLE I RESULTS ON HOTPOT QA [21] AND 2W IKI MULTI HOP QA [22] (200
> QUESTIONS PER DATASET ). W E REPORT EM/F1 AND EVIDENCE -LEVEL
> RECALL @K (K=2,5).
> Method EM ↑F1 ↑R@2 ↑R@5 ↑
> HotpotQA
> No RAG 21.3 29.8 ––Naive RAG 28.4 37.6 44.0 59.0 LightRAG (local) [19] 32.4 43.2 52.0 65.2 LightRAG (global) [19] 31.6 42.5 53.1 66.0 LightRAG (mix) [19] 33.9 46.5 56.8 67.5 A2RAG (Ours) 32.2 43.7 62.4 73.6 2WikiMultiHopQA
> No RAG 17.8 25.7 ––Naive RAG 24.9 34.2 40.8 54.2 LightRAG (local) [19] 28.9 39.6 48.6 60.7 LightRAG (global) [19] 29.4 40.0 50.4 62.3 LightRAG (mix) [19] 31.5 41.5 52.7 63.8 A2RAG (Ours) 30.0 42.9 58.9 69.2

Production-level Dataset. We observe a similar trend in a real-world QA setting on a production-level dataset provided by our industry partner [20], based on financial trading plat-form operation manuals. On this dataset, A2RAG improves end-to-end Recall@5 by approximately 15% over LightRAG (mix) and remains more robust under incomplete KGs, re-taining substantially higher Recall@5 under graph degradation (e.g., 67 .7 vs. 46 .5 at 20% KG node/edge removal). 

C. Efficiency on Multi-hop Queries: A2RAG vs. IRCoT 

IRCoT [29] is a strong iterative baseline for multi-hop question answering, but its retrieve–reason loops can incur substantial runtime overhead due to repeated LLM invocations and prompt growth across steps. We therefore evaluate the efficiency of A2RAG against IRCoT on multi-hop queries, focusing on system-level cost and latency under a fair and controlled setting. 

Multi-hop queries. We construct a multi-hop subset from the sampled evaluation data by selecting instances whose sup-porting facts span multiple documents/pages. This yields 180 queries on HotpotQA and 150 queries on 2WikiMultiHopQA. 

Fair comparison protocol. We align the maximum number of iterations by constraining IRCoT to a fixed step limit and A2RAG to bounded rewrite–retry rounds, and keep the retrieved evidence budget comparable across methods. 

Metrics. We report (i) total token usage (prompt + comple-tion), (ii) the number of LLM calls per query, and (iii) end-to-end latency. For latency, we report both mean and tail latency (P95) to reflect serving-time stability. 

Results. Tables II and III show that A2RAG is substantially more efficient than IRCoT on multi-hop queries. On HotpotQA (MH), A2RAG reduces total token usage from 30K to 16K and decreases the average number of LLM calls from 3.5 to 2.0. It also improves latency, achieving 2.7s mean latency (P95 4.2s) compared to 4.8s (P95 7.5s) for IRCoT. Similar gains are TABLE II EFFICIENCY ON HOTPOT QA (MH), N = 180 . L OWER IS BETTER .

Method Tokens ↓ Calls ↓ Lat ↓ P95 ↓

IRCoT [29] 30k 3.5 4.8 7.5 A2RAG 16k 2.0 2.7 4.2    

> TABLE III EFFICIENCY ON 2W IKI MULTI HOP QA (MH), N= 150 . L OWER IS BETTER .

Method Tokens ↓ Calls ↓ Lat ↓ P95 ↓

IRCoT [29] 35k 4.2 5.6 8.8 A2RAG 18k 2.3 3.2 5.0 

observed on 2WikiMultiHopQA (MH), where A2RAG lowers token consumption from 35K to 18K, reduces LLM calls from 4.2 to 2.3, and decreases mean latency from 5.6s (P95 8.8s) to 3.2s (P95 5.0s). 

Why A2RAG is faster. The efficiency advantage stems from A2RAG’s progressive retrieval policy. In contrast, A2RAG resolves multi-hop connections via bounded bridge discovery, and when local and bridge evidence are insufficient it performs a single structure-aware diffusion step (PPR) followed by provenance map-back, avoiding repeated iterative prompting. This reduces both the number of iterations and the per-iteration context growth, leading to lower token usage and latency. 

D. Progressive Retrieval Breakdown 

We analyze how A2RAG allocates retrieval effort across stages by recording the stage at which a query terminates (Local 1-hop, K-hop Bridge, or PPR-based global fallback), and reporting failed cases separately. As shown in Fig. 4, most queries are resolved without invoking the global fallback. On HotpotQA, 58% of queries terminate at the local 1-hop stage and 25% terminate after bridge discovery, while only 13% require the PPR-based fallback; 4% fail after bounded retries. A similar pattern holds on 2WikiMultiHopQA, where 52% terminate locally and 28% terminate at the bridge stage, with 15% requiring PPR and 5% failing. This distribution provides a mechanistic explanation for the efficiency gains reported in Sec. IV-C. A2RAG reserves the most expensive operation (global diffusion with provenance map-back) for a minority of hard cases, while the majority are handled by inexpensive local evidence collection or bounded mid-range bridge reasoning. Meanwhile, the non-trivial frac-tion of PPR-triggered queries suggests that leveraging KG structure for global diffusion can be essential for recovering distributed evidence and mitigating extraction loss when local or bridge-level graph evidence is insufficient, which we study next in Sec. IV-F. 

E. Ablation: The Role of Relation Seeding 

A2RAG extracts and aligns both entity seeds SV and relation-intent seeds SR from the query to steer evidence collection toward the relations implied by the question. To           

> Fig. 4. Stage-wise breakdown of A2RAG’s progressive retrieval. Each pie chart reports the fraction of queries that terminate at the local (1-hop), bridge ( K-hop), or PPR-based global fallback stage, with failed cases shown separately. TABLE IV ABLATION ON RELATION SEEDING . “F ULL ”USES ENTITY AND RELATION SEEDS (SV+SR), WHILE “N ODE -ONLY ”DISABLES RELATION SEEDS
> (SVONLY ).

Dataset Variant EM F1 R@2 R@5 

HotpotQA Full ( SV + SR) 32.2 43.7 62.4 73.6 Node-only ( SV ) 29.8 40.5 56.1 69.8 2WikiMultiHopQA Full ( SV + SR) 30.0 42.9 58.9 69.2 Node-only ( SV ) 27.2 38.7 51.5 64.7 

quantify the contribution of relation seeding, we perform an ablation that disables SR and keeps all other components un-changed (backbone LLM, dense encoder, progressive retrieval stages, and verification loop). The resulting node-only variant relies solely on entity seeds for local neighborhood retrieval, bridge discovery, and PPR map-back. Table IV shows that removing relation seeds consis-tently degrades both evidence recall and end-task QA ac-curacy. On HotpotQA, the node-only variant drops from 62.4/73.6 to 56.1/69.8 in Recall@2/Recall@5, and from 32.2/43.7 to 29.8/40.5 in EM/F1. On 2WikiMultiHopQA, Recall@2/Recall@5 decreases from 58.9/69.2 to 51.5/64.7, with EM/F1 dropping from 30.0/42.9 to 27.2/38.7. Notably, the recall reduction is more pronounced at small K (Re-call@2), indicating that relation seeding improves retrieval 

directionality and helps surface high-signal evidence early, rather than relying on broader context expansion. These results support the motivation behind incorporating 

SR in A2RAG. Entity-only seeding often yields ambiguous local neighborhoods where many edges are unrelated to the query’s relational intent. Relation seeds provide an additional constraint that focuses both local evidence collection and bridge search on relation-consistent connectors, thereby reduc-ing topological drift and improving the quality of the evidence set under the same retrieval budget. 

F. Robustness to Extraction Loss 

A central practical challenge in graph-based RAG is extrac-tion loss : the constructed knowledge graph inevitably misses nodes, relations, or fine-grained attributes present in the raw text, and the graph may further degrade under incremental Fig. 5. Robustness to extraction loss on HotpotQA measured by Recall@5 under random KG node/edge deletion. 

updates or imperfect extraction pipelines. To evaluate robust-ness under such lossy conditions, we simulate extraction loss by randomly deleting a fixed percentage of nodes and their incident edges from the KG while keeping the underlying text corpus unchanged. We then measure retrieval quality using 

Recall@5 on HotpotQA and 2WikiMultiHopQA, comparing A2RAG against a graph-only baseline (LightRAG [19]) and a text-only baseline (TextRAG). 

1) Deletion Stress Test: Figure 5 and Figure 6 show that A2RAG degrades substantially more gracefully than the graph-only baseline as deletion increases. On HotpotQA, LightRAG drops from 67.5 (0%) to 44.5 (40%), whereas A2RAG de-creases from 73.6 to 59.7 over the same range. A similar pattern holds on 2WikiMultiHopQA, where LightRAG falls from 63.8 to 41.0, while A2RAG declines from 69.2 to 55.4. In contrast, TextRAG remains nearly unchanged across deletion levels (e.g., 59.0 →58.0 on HotpotQA and 54.2 →53.4 on 2WikiMultiHopQA), consistent with the fact that the text corpus is not modified. These results support the key design of A2RAG: although graph structure is used for efficient navigation and multi-hop connectivity, the system ultimately grounds evidence in provenance chunks from the original text via the PPR map-back mechanism. When the KG is partially missing, graph-only retrieval suffers sharply because local neighborhoods and bridge connectors become unreliable. In contrast, A2RAG can still leverage the remaining structural signals to locate high-relevance regions and recover fine-grained evidence from source chunks, thereby maintaining higher recall under in-creasing extraction loss. At high deletion ratios, A2RAG gradually approaches the text-only baseline, which is expected when the graph becomes insufficient to provide additional structural guidance beyond flat retrieval. 

2) Effectiveness of PPR-based Provenance Map-back: To further understand the source of A2RAG’s robustness under extraction loss, we compare the effectiveness of provenance chunks retrieved via the PPR map-back mechanism with those retrieved by standard text-only retrieval. We observe a consistent pattern across datasets: chunks selected through PPR-guided mapping are more likely to contain the critical  

> Fig. 6. Robustness to extraction loss on 2WikiMultiHopQA measured by Recall@5 under random KG node/edge deletion.

facts required to answer the query, compared to top-ranked chunks retrieved by TextRAG. This advantage stems from the structural bias introduced by graph diffusion. Rather than relying solely on surface-level lexical similarity, PPR leverages the global connectivity of the knowledge graph to identify nodes that jointly explain multiple query seeds. Mapping these high-confidence structural anchors back to source chunks yields evidence that is both topically relevant and structurally grounded, often surfacing rare but de-cisive details such as numeric constraints or temporal qualifiers – that flat text retrieval frequently overlooks. As a result, even when the knowledge graph is incomplete, the PPR-based map-back mechanism enables A2RAG to re-cover higher-quality evidence from the original corpus. This observation aligns with the robustness trends reported above, where A2RAG consistently outperforms both graph-only and text-only baselines under increasing extraction loss. 

G. Discussion and Limitations 

Evaluation Scale and Generalization. Due to the cost of con-trolled multi-hop evaluation, our experiments are conducted on subsets of HotpotQA [21] and 2WikiMultiHopQA [22]. While the results are consistent across datasets and experimental settings, larger-scale evaluations on more diverse corpora would further strengthen the generality of our conclusions. 

Sensitivity to Seed Quality. The effectiveness of progressive retrieval depends on the quality of entity and relation seed extraction. Inaccurate or incomplete seeding can lead to sub-optimal local neighborhoods or misdirected bridge discovery, increasing reliance on global fallback. Although the verifica-tion and query rewriting loop mitigates some of these failures, improving robust and domain-adaptive seed extraction remains an important direction for future work. 

Scope of Structural Guidance and Maintenance. A2RAG relies on the knowledge graph primarily as a structural in-dex rather than a complete semantic store. When the graph becomes extremely sparse or severely fragmented, the benefit of structure-guided retrieval naturally diminishes, and the sys-tem behavior gradually approaches that of text-only retrieval. While this degradation is graceful (Sec. IV-F), it highlights that A2RAG still assumes the presence of a minimally infor-mative graph backbone to provide effective navigation signals. In addition, studying A2RAG under continuously evolving knowledge bases and long-term updates remains an open challenge, particularly when extraction pipelines introduce drift or partial graph degradation over time. Overall, these limitations do not detract from the core con-tribution of A2RAG but instead clarify the conditions under which adaptive, agentic graph retrieval is most effective, and point toward promising avenues for extending the framework. V. C ONCLUSION 

We introduced A2RAG, an adaptive and agentic GraphRAG framework that addresses two practical bottlenecks in exist-ing systems: one-size-fits-all retrieval under mixed-difficulty workloads and vulnerability to extraction loss in imperfect knowledge graphs. Rather than treating graph retrieval as a static pipeline, A2RAG formulates retrieval as a controlled, cost-aware process that progressively acquires evidence with stage-wise sufficiency checks, combining local-first expansion, bounded bridge discovery, and a structure-guided PPR fallback with provenance map-back to recover fine-grained, verifiable text evidence. Experiments on multi-hop QA benchmarks show that A2RAG improves retrieval effectiveness and effi-ciency over strong text-based and graph-based baselines while remaining resilient to incomplete and lossy graph construction, making graph-augmented LLM question answering more reli-able and practical under realistic deployment constraints. REFERENCES [1] A. Chowdhery, S. Narang, J. Devlin, M. Bosma, G. Mishra, A. Roberts, P. Barham, H. W. Chung, C. Sutton, S. Gehrmann et al. , “Palm: Scal-ing language modeling with pathways,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 24, no. 240, pp. 1–113, 2023. [2] L. Lai, C. Luo, Y. Lou, M. Ju, and Z. Yang, “Graphy’our data: Towards end-to-end modeling, exploring and generating report from raw data,” in Companion of the 2025 International Conference on Management of Data , 2025, pp. 147–150. [3] Y. Wang, H. Le, A. Gotmare, N. Bui, J. Li, and S. Hoi, “CodeT5+: Open code large language models for code understanding and generation,” in 

Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023. [4] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, G. Krueger, and I. Sutskever, “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervi-sion,” in Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 139. PMLR, 2021, pp. 8748–8763. [5] X. Tang, L. Chen, W. Yang, Z. Yang, M. Ju, X. Shu, Z. Yang, and Y. Tang, “Tabular-textual question answering: From parallel program generation to large language models,” World Wide Web , vol. 28, no. 4, p. 42, 2025. [6] J. Wu, X. Tang, Z. Yang, K. Hao, L. Lai, and Y. Liu, “An experimental evaluation of llm on image classification,” in Australasian Database Conference , 2024, pp. 506–518. [7] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, B. Ichter, F. Xia, E. H. Chi, Q. V. Le, and D. Zhou, “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. [8] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. R. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao, “React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. [9] L. Chen, B. Han, X. Wang, J. Zhao, W. Yang, and Z. Yang, “Machine learning methods in weather and climate applications: A survey,” Applied Sciences , vol. 13, no. 21, p. 12019, 2023. [10] L. Huang, W. Yu, W. Ma, W. Zhong, Z. Feng, H. Wang, Q. Chen, W. Peng, X. Feng, B. Qin, and T. Liu, “A survey on hallucination in large language models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions,” 2023. [11] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. K¨ uttler, M. Lewis, W. Yih, T. Rockt¨ aschel, S. Riedel, and D. Kiela, “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks,” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. [12] Y. Gao, Y. Xiong, X. Gao, K. Jia, J. Pan, Y. Bi, Y. Dai, J. Sun, M. Wang, and H. Wang, “Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey,” 2023. [13] V. Karpukhin, B. Oguz, S. Min, P. Lewis, L. Wu, S. Edunov, D. Chen, and W. Yih, “Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answer-ing,” in Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) . Association for Computa-tional Linguistics, 2020, pp. 6769–6781. [14] G. Izacard and E. Grave, “Leveraging passage retrieval with genera-tive models for open domain question answering,” in Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL) , 2021. [15] D. Edge, H. Trinh, N. Cheng, J. Bradley, A. Chao, A. Mody, S. Truitt, and J. Larson, “From local to global: A graph RAG approach to query-focused summarization,” CoRR , vol. abs/2404.16130, 2024. [16] B. Peng, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, X. Bo, H. Shi, C. Hong, Y. Zhang, and S. Tang, “Graph retrieval-augmented generation: A survey,” 2025. [17] B. Jin, C. Xie, J. Zhang, K. K. Roy, Y. Zhang, Z. Li, R. Li, X. Tang, S. Wang, Y. Meng, and J. Han, “Graph chain-of-thought: Augmenting large language models by reasoning on graphs,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , 2024. [18] C. Huan, Z. Meng, Y. Liu, Z. Yang, Y. Zhu, Y. Yun, S. Li, R. Gu, X. Wu, H. Zhang, C. Hong, S. Ma, G. Chen, and C. Tian, “Scaling graph chain-of-thought reasoning: A multi-agent framework with efficient llm serving,” 2025. [19] Z. Guo, L. Xia, Y. Yu, T. Ao, and C. Huang, “Lightrag: Simple and fast retrieval-augmented generation,” in Findings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2025. [20] W. Wang, J. Yu, Z. Yang, M. Ju, S. Yu, J. Wu, L. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Shepherd, and W. Zhang, “Aefa: An ensemble framework for fraud detection in the forex market,” in International Conference on Advanced Data Mining and Applications , 2025, pp. 34–49. [21] Z. Yang, P. Qi, S. Zhang, Y. Bengio, W. W. Cohen, R. Salakhutdinov, and C. D. Manning, “Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering,” in Proceedings of EMNLP , 2018. [22] X. Ho, A.-K. D. Nguyen, S. Sugawara, and A. Aizawa, “Constructing a multi-hop qa dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps,” in Proceedings of COLING , 2020. [23] S. Jeong, J. Baek, S. Cho, S. J. Hwang, and J. C. Park, “Adaptive-rag: Learning to adapt retrieval-augmented large language models through question complexity,” in Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL) , 2024. [24] A. Asai, Z. Wu, Y. Wang, A. Sil, and H. Hajishirzi, “Self-rag: Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11511 , 2023. [25] X. Wang, P. Sen, R. Li, and E. Yilmaz, “Adaptive retrieval-augmented generation for conversational systems,” Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , 2025. [26] P. L. Mufei Li, Siqi Miao, “Simple is effective: The roles of graphs and large language models in knowledge-graph-based retrieval-augmented generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.20724 , 2024. [27] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd, “The pagerank citation ranking: Bringing order to the web,” Stanford Digital Library Technolo-gies Project, Tech. Rep. 1999-66, 1999. [28] T. H. Haveliwala, “Topic-sensitive pagerank,” in Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW) , 2002. [29] H. Trivedi, N. Balasubramanian, T. Khot, and A. Sabharwal, “Interleav-ing retrieval with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive multi-step questions,” in Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2023. [30] V. A. Traag, L. Waltman, and N. J. van Eck, “From louvain to leiden: guaranteeing well-connected communities,” Scientific Reports , vol. 9, no. 1, p. 5233, 2019.